George's Sinai and Palestine Campaign

Sinai Campaign

  Into Sinai/Background

    From NZHistory.net:
      The Sinai campaign arose from a change in British thinking about the defence of the Suez Canal. Initially, British forces in Egypt had built a defensive zone of strongpoints and trenches along the western bank of the canal. After the raid at Ismailia by Ottoman forces in February 1915 this strategy was extended to the eastern bank. But this did little to improve the overall situation for the British.

      Directly defending the canal required large numbers of troops. By the beginning of 1916 the demands of the Western Front and other more active theatres of war meant that the British Army could not spare soldiers for such a manpower-intensive, yet passive, scheme. Furthermore, these defences extended only a few kilometres into the Sinai Peninsula. While the British could be reasonably confident of fighting off any future Ottoman raids on the canal, they couldn’t prevent such raids happening. Under this strategy, the Ottomans didn’t even have to make any more raids – the mere threat that they might do so would keep a big British force tied down.

      In early 1916 the newly appointed commander of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force (MEF), Lieutenant-General Archibald Murray, recognised this problem and offered his superiors in London a potential solution. Murray argued that the canal could be best defended by going on the offensive and seizing control of the Sinai Peninsula from the Ottoman Turks. Not only would this remove any threat of future raids on the canal, it would also reverse the strategic situation in the area. With control of the Sinai, the British could keep disproportionately large numbers of Ottoman troops tied down defending southern Palestine.

      Reflecting the new strategic direction of the British war effort in the region, in March 1916 the name of Murray’s command was changed from the MEF to the Egyptian Expeditionary Force (EEF). His army was also increased in size, gaining the New Zealand and Australian mounted horse brigades, which had been reinforced and rebuilt after their ordeal at Gallipoli. The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade and the three Australian Light Horse brigades were grouped together as the Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division. This rather ungainly official title was quickly superseded, even in some of the official orders and communications of the EEF, by the colloquial but better-sounding ‘Anzac Mounted Division’.

      There was no doubting the strategic soundness of Murray′s argument. But the barren conditions confronting any army that ventured into the harsh desert environment of the Sinai Peninsula – not least the lack of water – raised practical problems. There were some wells and oases scattered across the peninsula, but none large enough to sustain the numbers of men and animals required. The construction of a railway and pipeline from the British base at Kantara in Egypt to El Arish on the Sinai–Palestine border lay at the heart of Murray’s plans. The progress of these projects would dictate the rate of advance, and protecting them from Ottoman attack would be the main focus of the army. Once El Arish was captured and connected to the railway and pipeline it would become a base from which British forces could cut off Ottoman access to the Sinai and threaten the garrisons in southern Palestine.

      Murray’s plan won cautious approval from the British War Office, which authorised him to advance into the Sinai as far as Katia oasis, 40 km from the Suez Canal. In February 1916 men of the Royal Engineers and the Egyptian Labour Corps began work on the railway and pipeline.

      In April the EEF suffered a brief setback when an Ottoman raiding force surprised a British mounted brigade manning forward outposts around Katia. But this raid did not affect the slow yet steady progress of the railway and pipeline. Having learnt from Katia, the EEF kept its infantry divisions close to the advancing railhead while its mounted troops fanned out in front of them to drive Ottoman patrols away and give warning of any large-scale attack. This patrol work proved its worth when in late July a large Ottoman force was discovered advancing across the Sinai near Bir el Abd. This led to the only set-piece battle of the campaign, at Romani on 3–4 August 1916.

      The Battle of Romani was the last major offensive action by Ottoman forces in the campaign. In its aftermath the EEF advanced across the Sinai without any further interference. This did not mean an end to the fighting, though, as the Ottoman garrisons at El Arish and Rafa had to be overcome and the remaining Ottoman outposts in the Sinai still threatened the EEF’s line of communications. The Ottoman Turks withdrew from El Arish on the eve of a planned British attack in December. All Ottoman troops were withdrawn from the Sinai after the Anzac Mounted Division destroyed the outpost at Magdhaba a few days later.

      From NZHistory.net:
        In August 1916 No 15 (New Zealand) Company, Imperial Camel Corps, was formed from men originally intended as reinforcements for the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade. After extensive training the New Zealand cameliers joined the 1st and 2nd battalions, plus a number of other Imperial Camel Corps companies, at El Mazaar oasis in the Sinai in December 1916. On 19 December they were formally grouped into a single brigade made up of three camel battalions – the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade. In addition to the existing camel battalions, the Brigade included the newly raised 3rd Battalion to which No 15 (New Zealand) Company was initially assigned. The Camel Brigade's baptism of fire came a mere four days later when it took part in the Battle of Magdhaba.

      From With the Cameliers in Palestine:
        The Fifteenth Company was formed of New Zealanders under Captain J. G. McCallum, in August, 1916, and after completing its training at Abbassia, it trekked across country to Kantara, and then across the Sinai Desert to link up with the main body of the Camel Corps at Mazar, in December, the day before the army advanced on El Arish.

  Magdhaba

    From NZHistory.govt.nz:
      By mid-December 1916 the Egyptian Expeditionary Force had advanced across the Sinai to within sight of the original objective of the campaign, the town of El Arish. The Ottoman garrison abandoned El Arish and the town was occupied by the Anzac Mounted Division and the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade on 21 December without a shot being fired. Soon after, reconnaissance patrols found that the Ottoman garrison guarding the oasis of Magdhaba, 40 km inland, showed no signs of being withdrawn. General Philip Chetwode, commander of the Desert Column, ordered the Anzac Mounted Division and the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade to attack Magdhaba as soon as they could be relieved at El Arish by British infantry. The arrival of Scottish soldiers of the 52nd (Lowland) Division the following day was the signal for the attack.

      After an all-night ride across the desert the assault force halted 6 km from Magdhaba, within sight of the garrison’s campfires. Major-General Harry Chauvel, commander of the Anzac Mounted Division, used the hours before dawn to reconnoitre the Ottoman positions and devise a detailed plan of attack. The defences consisted of five large redoubts ringed around the oasis of Magdhaba and the wadi that ran through it. These were buttressed by a series of trenches that filled many (but not all) of the gaps between them. Defending these positions were two battalions of the Ottoman 80th Infantry Regiment, supported by a battery of mountain artillery (four guns) and a small detachment of Arab camelry, giving the garrison a total strength of nearly 1400 men.

      Chauvel decided to encircle the Ottoman positions to ensure the garrison could not escape and then overwhelm the defences by attacking the redoubts from all sides. The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade was tasked with attacking the redoubt guarding the north-eastern approach to Magdhaba and its surrounding trenches. By 10 a.m. everyone was in position and the attacks began, supported by the 13-pounder field guns of the Somerset and Inverness batteries, Royal Horse Artillery, and the mountain guns of the Hong Kong and Singapore (Mountain) Battery. The troopers of the Wellington and Canterbury Mounted Rifles advanced on horseback to within 1.5 km of the defences before dismounting to attack on foot. At this point the volume of Ottoman rifle and machine-gun fire intensified, and the New Zealanders were also targeted by an Ottoman mountain-gun battery sited directly opposite them. The Ottoman fire was inaccurate and casualties were extremely light, but the progress of the New Zealand attack was slowed considerably. The same was true of the Australian Light Horse and Camel brigades, and after four hours of fighting there was little to show for their efforts.

      By this stage the horses of the Anzac Mounted Division had been without water for nearly 20 hours. Chauvel knew that he would soon have to decide whether to break off the attack and return to El Arish or continue in the hope that his men could capture Magdhaba and its wells before the horses were fatally exhausted by thirst. At that moment news came that the cameleers, together with troopers of the 3rd Australian Light Horse Regiment, had overrun the redoubt to the west of the New Zealanders. With this breach of their perimeter the resistance offered by the mostly Arab Ottoman garrison began to crumble. Within an hour another redoubt had fallen and by 3.30 p.m. the New Zealanders had rushed the Ottoman trenches in their sector. Soon after, the Ottoman mountain battery that had been firing at them all day was captured, guns intact, by a small party of men from the Canterbury Mounted Rifles. By now the Turkish and Arab soldiers were surrendering in droves. The last organised resistance was mopped up by 4.30 p.m. and the battle for Magdhaba was over.

      Ottoman casualties amounted to 97 killed and 1282 Turkish and Arab prisoners taken, including the Turkish commander of the 80th Infantry Regiment, Khadir Bey. As well as the mountain guns captured by the New Zealanders, the booty included four machine guns, 1052 rifles, 100,000 rounds of small-arms ammunition, 40 horses and 51 camels. The attacking cameleers and Anzac mounted troopers suffered 146 casualties (22 killed and 124 wounded), with 51 horses killed or wounded. New Zealand losses were nine killed and 46 wounded (including 10 wounded New Zealand cameleers from the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade).

    From: With the Cameliers in Palestine - extract from Chapter VIII:
      In December, 1916, a mounted force consisting of the Anzac Mounted Division (1st, 2nd, and 3rd A.L.H. Brigades, and N.Z.M.R. Brigade) and the newly constituted Imperial Camel Brigade was concentrated at Kilo 128, ten miles beyond Mazar. An attack on El Arish, twenty miles away was ordered to be carried out on the evening of December 20, and, travelling all night, the force arrived at daylight on the 21st to find that the Turks had retired without risking a fight, to a prepared position at Magdhaba, about thirty miles southeast from El Arish.

      General Chetwode at once decided to surprise the Turks at Magdhaba, and ordered a force consisting of the First and Third Australian Light Horse Brigades, the New Zealand Mounted Rifle Brigade, and the Imperial Camel Brigade, all under the command of Major-General Chauvel, to march at midnight on December 22, for a night ride of thirty miles along the wide, dried-up bed of a prehistoric stream—the River of Egypt of the Bible, but now known as the Wadi El Arish.

      This was a good try-out for the newly formed Camel Brigade (in which was included the 15th N.Z. Company), which received its title as a Brigade on December 19, as within eighty-four hours afterwards it took part in two night advances of a total distance of fifty miles, the capture of El Arish, a successful all-day battle (resulting in the capture of the whole of the Turkish force at Magdhaba) and a retirement of thirty miles to its base.

      During the advance on Magdhaba the Cameliers found that the nature of the ground over which they were riding in the dark, was in marked contrast to that in the desert with which they had been so long accustomed. Here the ground was firm, with, scattered tufts of scrub growing on its dry surface, and as the column moved on steadily in the cold night, the unusual sounds were heard of the plop, plop, plop of the pads on the feet of the camels. The big brown Bikanir camels made good pace, and before daylight the bivouac fires of the enemy were seen in the distance, a sure sign that the Turks were not anticipating an attack to be made on them so soon after the British advance on El Arish.

      The Turks had established six strong redoubts and numerous rifle-pits, with mountain guns to support them. The broken nature of the ground was wholly in favour of the enemy whose concealed positions were difficult to detect.

      The 15th N.Z. Company of the I.C.C. had marched all night as a part of the Third Battalion and dismounted at 5 a.m. some four and a half miles from Magdhaba. The Company advanced in extended order as a dismounted attack, and formed the first wave of the battalion. The First Light Horse Brigade advanced along the dry bed of the wadi on the right of the I.C.C. while on the left of the latter were the New Zealand Mounted Rifles, and farther to their left was the Third Australian Light Horse Brigade, of which the 10th Regiment made a wide detour and attacked the position in the rear. The Turks resisted stubbornly, and by shell, machine-gun and rifle fire held off the attack all the forenoon.

      At 1 p.m. Major-General Chauvel was informed that the attempts of the engineers left at Bir Lahfan, fourteen miles back, to procure a water supply, had failed. As the nearest supply was thirty miles away unless Magd-haba was captured, and as there appeared to be no prospect of an immediate success in the attack on the Turkish position, the General reluctantly decided to break off the engagement for the sake of the horses. The camels on the other hand would not be inconvenienced by the lack of water for several days longer, which showed their suitability for raids of this nature where the element of time counted for so much in the case of the horses.

      However, about this time the Camel Brigade in the centre with the Third Australian Light Horse Regiment of the First Brigade on their right, made a spirited charge, the former over a wide level stretch of ground perfectly free from cover, and the latter along the level bed of the wadi. With loud cheers the Cameliers rushed forward on the higher ground, while the Light Horsemen co-operated on the lower ground in the wadi, and although met by a strong fire they carried the position at the point of the bayonet, capturing the force of ninety-five Turks in the redoubt. This success turned the scale in favour of the British, and General Chauvel ordered the attack to be pressed forward at all points, with the result that by 4 p.m. the N.Z.M.R. and Third L.H. Brigades had captured other redoubts, and as the 10th L.H. Regiment had captured the Aulad Ali position in the rear along with three hundred prisoners, by 4.30 p.m. the whole of Magdhaba was in our hands with a loss to the Turks of 1,282 prisoners and all their arms, equipment and stores. The British loss amounted to 22 killed and 124 wounded. The 15th Company I.C.C. suffered a loss of ten casualties, all wounded, in this, their first engagement.

      A small force of mounted men was left to clear up the battlefield, and the main body after watering their animals from the wells in the wadi, set out in the dark on their return journey to El Arish. After the long night march from El Arish and the strain of the battle the thirty miles return march in the darkness and dust, from Magdhaba, imposed a great tax on the endurance of all ranks in the force. Men continually fell asleep in the saddle, while their animals would wander off out of the line of march in search of something to graze on, but at length in the early morning of December 24, the column arrived at El Arish, with little energy left to get ready to celebrate Christmas.

      Although not so mobile as the Horse Brigade on the harder ground our forces were to be operating on from now onwards, the Camel Brigade was able to take part effectively in the future operations, and added materially to the offensive power of the mounted divisions to which it was attached.

      From Christmas onward, reconnaissances by the mounted forces were constantly carried out towards the east and south from El Arish.

    From a Steve Becker forum post:
      Mates,

      I notice the 100 years since the Battle of Romani passed unrecorded here and the failed battles fought by Chauvel following that battle during Aug, Sept and Oct, and the long break to Dec after Mazar and Moghara.

      Why Chauvel allowed the Turks the retire at their leisure to El Arish is unknown from the records, sure our horse were worn out and water was a problem, but these were not restrictions, as the water and rail line was progressing and water still could be found, while LH bdes were being rested.

      Anyway on the 22nd Dec, allowed Chauvel to advance to check out reports (air) that El Arish was abandoned, what followed tomorrow is a battle that Chauvel almost lost, but for good luck, and as Napoleon always asked about his Generals "Are they lucky".

      Here is some thing I wrote some time ago on the Camel Corps at this battle;

      The Battle of Magdhaba
      By Steve Becker

      With the Allied Victory at Romani in August had for the moment relieved any direct pressure of a Turkish invasion of Egypt. This and the present advances to Mazar in September had taken the Allied Army towards the major Turkish stronghold in the Sinai at El Arish, and allowed the strong mounted units of the Army to carry out a number of lighting strikes against the isolated Turkish posts in the Sinai.

      By the end of November 1916 General Archibald Murray, the Commander and Chief of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, now felt that he was ready to comply with the Commander General Imperial Staff Instructions and advance on El Arish and clear the region of the Turks, which would not only relieve any direct pressure on Egypt from invasion by the Turkish Army, and, also keep large numbers of Turkish troops from moving to other fronts. General Murray was also aware that there were at present only two Turkish Divisions in the Palestine-Sinai Area. These Divisions the 3rd in the area of Gaza and the Sinai, and 27th around Damascus in Palestine, was known as Arab Division, which were recruited from the local population and thought to be less then trustworthy, both were under strength and combined contained between 6,000 to 10,000 men.

      On the 19 December the Camel Brigade was officially formed, and began to assemble around El Mazar, General Clarence Smith VC MC slowly organized his scatted companies into the new Camel Battalions, with the attached Hong Kong and Singapore Battery of Mountain Artillery, for an advance on El Arish. This organization was in such a hurry that no Machine Gun Company or Field Ambulance were attached and only ten companies had arrived in time to take part in the advance. The last unit to arrive was the 14th company, under Captain Tolmer, and was made up of ex-Light Horsemen, many of whom had served on Gallipoli, they had left Abbassia on the 13 November with the new 2nd Battalion HQ, and along with the 15th New Zealand company, had been on patrol in the area of El Geeila and the Canal till called to the Brigade on the 16 December. The 1st Battalion detached the 4th company to Bir El Abd, while Lieutenant John Williams’s section came under command of the 1st company.

      The Camel Brigade at this time consisted of the following companies;


      Camel Bde HQ   Gen Smith VC      Bde/Maj Stocker

      1st Camel Battalion   LtCol Langley           4th Co   Capt Denson
                                2ic Capt Mills           6th British Co   Capt Pettit
                               Adjt Capt Goldenstedt   7th British Co   Capt Gregory
                                                            12th Co   Capt Smith

      2nd Camel Battalion   Maj Bassett                    3rd Co   Capt Naylor
                                  2ic unknown            5th British Co   Capt Wilson
                                  Adjt Lt Pape            14th Co   Capt Tolmer

      3rd Camel Battalion   Maj Huddlestone            1st Co   Lt Cashman
                                 2ic unknown            11th Co   Capt Creswell
                                 Adjt Capt Tod            15th NZ Co   Capt McCallum

      HK&S Battery             Maj Moore RGA
      1/1 Welsh FAmb        unknown
      2/1 FC Cheshire RE    Lt Drake RE

      To carry out the Raid on El Arish, the Command of the Desert Column was given to General Philip Chetwode, and consisted of the Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division, under General Harry Chauvel, composed of the 1st and 3rd Australian Light Horse Brigades, the New Zealand Mounted Brigade and attached was the newly organized Imperial Camel Corps Brigade.

      The Turkish Garrison at El Arish was believed to be around 1600 strong from the 1st and 2nd Battalion’s and the MG company of the 80th Turkish Infantry Regiment (27th Division), attached to the 3rd Division, and well entrenched while smaller Turkish garrison from the 2nd Battalion 80th Turkish Infantry were situated at El Magdhaba. The 3rd Battalion 80th Turkish Infantry was at Abu Aweigila, along the Wadi El Arish which protected the Turkish rail head at El Kossaima.

      Air reports from the 67th Squadron Australian Flying Corps continued to come in on the Turks during December and the latest report on the 20 December stated that the Turks appeared to be withdrawing from El Arish, General Murray immediately ordered General Chetwode to advance on El Arish and confirm this report. He allocated the 52nd Lowland Infantry Division for the occupation, only it was slow in moving, thus allowing the swifter mounted units of the Desert Column to move on El Arish that night.

      The Camel companies had a quiet night as they had been assigned to travel on the longer southern route, as the horses of the Light Horse Brigades were still not accustomed to the smell of the Camels, and in the morning of the 21 December, after a long night march of 23 miles from Mazar units of the Desert Column had surrounded the town, which was found to be clear of the Turks. The sight which greeted the Cameleers in the morning was a long line of dehydrated exhausted Scotties from the 52nd Division, who had been left behind by their Battalions during the night, water was given to these men only the Cameleers were told to leave them as they had to push on to the town.

      The settlement of El Arish was like an oasis in the desert with palm trees, grass and the many white roofs of the mosque and the houses, and the troops took advantage of this to rest after a long night march.

      The unopposed capture of the town promptly allowed the British to use it as an advance base, and the rail and water pipe lines were advanced towards the town. El Arish was also used to ship in supplies and move up the remainder of the Infantry, which began to arrived on the 22 December, it also gave General Murray an important base, which would prove invaluable in the months ahead, with the arrival on the 22nd of General Chetwode, who without delay ordered General Chauval to pursuit the withdrawing Turks. Patrols were sent out to establish in which direction the Turks had gone as they could move to the east and the border post at Rafa or along the Wadi to El Magdhaba, this was soon evident when word came in by air of the increased garrison at El Magdhaba and Chetwode ordered Chauval to take his Division and the Camel Brigade and advance on El Magdhaba that night.

      The Garrison at El Magdhaba now consisted of around 1700 men from the 2nd Battalion under Major Izzat Bey, and 3rd Battalion under Major Rushti Bay of the 80th Turkish Infantry Regiment (27th Division), under the Regimental command of Khadir Bey, with one section of one Machine gun, of the 80th MG Company, and along with one Mountain battery, of four mountain guns, from the 11th Artillery Regiment, attached to 3rd Artillery Regiment, there was also a number of irregular units and a small Turkish Camel company, completed all the available troops in Sinai, other then the 1st Battalion and most of the MG company of the 80th Infantry Regiment, which had returned to Khan Yunus.

      Magdhaba was a small settlement on the north side of the Wadi El Arish, which at this time of year was dry and contained the only wells for many miles. The town itself lay partially in the wadi and was about 20 miles from El Arish and over 30 miles from Rafa. The Turks had heavy fortified the surrounding area with five large redoubts, these were placed to cover all the approaches and to strengthen them a number of trenches were dug on their flanks to cover the redoubts.  The four guns were placed to the north of the wadi near the village to cover the open ground to the north-west which was flat and open of hard sand bare of all cover for over four miles, to the north-east the ground was covered with low scrub bushes while to the south the terrain was broken by a large number of sand dunes.

      At El Arish as the troops prepared for the march, there was a scarcity of water in the town until more wells could be dug, a supply column of camels from the Camel Transport Corps was dispatched from Mazar in the afternoon and the troops would have to wait until it arrived to draw rations. This column subsequently became lost and mixed up with the 52nd Infantry Division as it struggled up to El Arish, with the result the long delayed supply column arrived during the night few of the animals got a full drink before they had to leave at midnight.

      The men and animals of the Camel Brigade had no time to water and as they carried five days water supply in there fantasise conveniently there was no immediate need of resupply. The Brigade was ordered to be concentrated in the wadi El Arish by 10 pm and all seven companies moved into their order of march, meanwhile there was some delay in moving as the mounted units continued to be resupplied before beginning there march, the 3rd company under Captain Fred Naylor along with the 7th company under Captain Fleming Gregory were detailed to remain behind and to help defend the town while the 4th company under Captain Herbert Denson, less the one section still with the 1st Company, was to remain at Bir el Abd.

      It was well after midnight when the force finely set out with the Light horse regiments leading setting a brisk pace as they moved off towards Magdhaba, the night air was clear and cold and the firm ground allowed the horses to move swiftly. Meanwhile the Camel Brigade moved slowly along the wadi as the men fought off the effects of another night in the saddle and the bitterly cold night sent a chill to the bone, there was no smoking on the ride when a few puffs on a weed would have made all the difference. The Camel Brigade was slower then the Light Horse however the troops maintained their distance without a difficulty as the Division followed the main trail from El Arish to Magdhaba which ran along the telegraph line and the wadi.

      At 3.50 am on the 23 December the lights of the camp fires at Magdhaba could be seen in the distance as the troops push on till around 5 am when a halt was called 4 miles from the objective there the troops rested till morning when General Chauvel and staff made a reconnaissance of the Turks and found that the smoke from the camp fires covered the town and the surrounding area, and the view of number of redoubts was obtained along with the extent of the enemies position.

      The Camel Brigade had halted and dismounted near the Inverness battery as the camels and their holders moved to the rear, this like the Light Horse regiments required that every one in four men in the company be used to hold the animals and so were left out of battle while the remainder of the men would carry out the attack, the holders moved the camels into the wadi out of sight as the battalions sorted their companies out and began to move forward to the form up point. Some of the camel companies were at full strength having just arrived in the desert while most had been in the field for some time and there unit strength was low.

      At 7.50 am reports was received by aircraft that they had been fired on by the Turks and that there was no sign of any Turkish reinforcements beyond Ruafa 8 miles south-east of Magdhaba which held a small garrison. General Chauval was now limited to the time he could spend at Magdhaba as most of the animals had not drunk for some time and with a battle to be fought during a hot day and little water at Magdhaba meant that the town would need to fall quickly or the animals would be in trouble.

      Orders for the attack were issued at once with the 3rd Light Horse and NZ Mounted Brigades moving to the east and north-east to attack while the 1st Light Horse Brigade was held in reserve, the Camel Brigade was directed to pin the Turks frontally and allow time for the envelopment by the Light Horse. There were only three batteries of artillery available to support Chauvel, these were the Somerset and Inverness batteries of the RHA, with twelve 18 pounder guns and the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery with six 10 pounder Mountain guns, both the RHA Batteries deployed to the north the Camel Brigade Head Quarters where they could bring fire on the Turkish’s redoubts and search for he Turkish guns while the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery was moved closer to the action next to the Wadi to cover the Camel battalion’s advance. The action would commence once the mounted troops were in position and the battle would start with the artillery commencing fire.

      As the Light Horse manoeuvred into position the companies of the Camel Brigade moved forward on foot only the Camel Brigade was at a disadvantage with over four miles to travel before they could reach the Turkish defences. The Cameleers set off at 9 am with the 3rd Battalion leading followed by the 1st Battalion with the 2nd Battalion in Brigade reserve, the going was without interference as the men approached to within Turkish artillery range with the companies strung out over a wide area of desert.

      The Camel Brigade deployed 3rd Battalion under Captain Charles Wright to lead the attack with the 1st company under Lieutenant John Cashman and the attached one officer and seventeen men of the 4th company in front, the 15th New Zealand Company under Captain John McCallum in support and the 11th company under Captain Randolph Creswell in battalion reserve. The 1st Battalion under Major George langley was in direct support of the 3rd Battalion with the 6th company under Captain Hubert Pettit and the 12th company under Captain George Smith in Battalion reserve while the 2nd Battalion under Major John Bassett was held in reserve with the 5th company under Captain Charles Wilson detached to guard the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery and Brigade HQ leaving only the 14th company under Captain James Tolmer with the 2nd Battalion as the Brigade reserve.

      By 9.25 am the New Zealand Brigade was in position with the 3rd Light Horse Brigade as they moved to secure their form up points. The artillery opened fire at 9.55 am as they searched for the Turkish battery when the New Zealand Brigade decided to attack not waiting for the Camel Brigade to get into position only due to the terrain and the heat affect on observation for the guns was limited as the fall of shot could not accurately be corrected. At this time the attacking companies were still moving into position with the 1st company on the right closest to the wadi while the 15th New Zealand company was moved to the open left flank to extend the firing line, both deployed on a one section frontage in three lines with the Lewis guns on the open left flank to enable them to engage the Turkish redoubt and cover the advance, with the 11th company still followed behind the 1st Company. To the 3rd Battalion’s rear deployed Major Langley’s 1st Battalion with its 6th company in support and the 12th company still in reserve.

      At 10 am a message was dropped by plane reporting the Turks were withdrawing (these were Turkish soldiers who were deserting), and Chauvel seeing the Camel brigade was still short of the Turkish defences quickly ordered the 1st Light Horse Brigade into action. Meanwhile the 1st company was still progressing in extended order as the men moved up across the barren surface in parallel ranks 200 yards apart until the Turks started to target them forcing the men to ground where they lay exposed to the Turkish fire for some time before commencing to move in section rushes of 25 yards covered by each section shooting at the redoubt in the distance. Capt Wright seeing the 1st and 15th NZ Company held up along the wadi ordered the 11th company forward, only as they approached the line now found themselves exposed to the Turkish fire and joined the 1st company sheltering in the sand.

      As the Camel companies approached the Turkish redoubts they came under a violent fusillade from rifle fire and artillery and the mistaken reporting of the Turks came home to the leading squadrons of the 1st Light Horse Brigade as a intense fire was directed at them forcing the Brigade into the wadi as they retired out of range while the 3rd Light Horse Regiment was detached to the attack dismounted along the wadi around 10.30 am.

      At 1115 am Major Moore was directed by the Commander Royal Artillery, LtCol Walshe CRA Anzac MD, to move the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery across the Wadi into a position to the west of No 2 redoubt and behind General Cox 1st Light Horse Brigade Headquarters to provide direct fire onto the redoubt and cover the advance of the Camel companies and the 3rd Light Horse Regiment, this could also bring the battery under effective fire from the Turkish guns.

      By 11.50 General Chauvel dispatched a report to Chetwode telling him of the progress of the battle which was still going well only time was getting on and the Turks defences were still to be reached. Major Langley had in the meanwhile seen the lack of progress by the 3rd Battalion and moved the 6th company forward on the 15th NZ companies open left flank to extend the firing line and to bring fire onto the Turks in Number 3 redoubt, only to find the exposed surface could not be overcome when the Turks had all the advantages of position and could make little progress with the Turkish fire directed at them from both front and their left flank.

      The Camel Brigade was still struggling across the open terrain in front of redoubt No 2 where the firepower of the Turks was at its maximum on that long flat surface. General Chauval had placed his chief reliance on this attack only the terrain and skilful placement of the Turks defences, all were contributing to the lack of progress. By midday this attack had died down as the amount of fire directed on them was too heavy, this fire despite its ferocity was very inaccurate only this mattered little when you’re under it. The 1st company at this time had taken cover in a wash out which lead into the main wadi and were arranged in depth which gave shelter to the men, meanwhile the 11th and 15th companies were fully exposed the full fury of the enemies fire as the men pushed there faces into the compacted sand or looked for that all to rare tuft of grass or that small mound of sand to escape the swarm of bullets passing over head. The men had quickly became exhausted by the advance with the weight of ammunition and equipment, the movement from position to position, the distance travelled and the hot sun along with a lack of water as their water bottles were soon were empty, added to the fact that ammunition was limited to their basic load and with the constant firing and time in action this was running out and any resupply would be difficult and dangerous.

      At 12.15 pm the word came in to commit the Camel Brigade reserve as both Battalions were now in the sand and unable to move. This reserve consisted of just the 14th company under Captain Tolmer who took only 2 sections into the attack leaving the remainder under Lieutenant Leonard Young only these were shortly committed in support after 20 minutes.

      At 1.05 pm a report had come in of the lack of water at Bir Lahfan where a field troop of engineers had been sent to investigate, this was a significant problem as there was no water closer then El Arish and unless Magdhaba should fall, and this didn’t look like it would happen soon, the horses would be in trouble. With reluctance General Chauvel telegraphed to Chetwode at 1.50 pm to say that the progress of the action was disappointing and that he was going to order the troops to break off the battle.

      Meanwhile in front of redoubt No 2 the companies of the Camel Brigade were progressing and had gained touch with the left flank of B and C Squadron of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment in the wadi El Arish about 100 metres from the Turks. A quick discussion ensured as the officers decided on the best approach as they had to cross a wide level stretch of open flat ground and in the end a charge was called. The exhausted 11th Company was quickly brought up to align with the 1st Company and bayonets attached as the men made ready for the last effort. In the intervening time the 15th NZ Company and the 6th Company would provide covering and suppressing fire with the all company Lewis gun sections at both the No 2 redoubt and the flanking No 3 redoubt.

      Around 2 pm the men of the Light Horse and Camel Brigade leaped into action and with wild cheers from dry throats the men surged across the open ground under a ferocious fire from the Turks, dropping a number of men, only the troops pressed forward as they gained the Turkish breastworks the Turks quickly put up their arms and made signs of surrender. This charge was under the protective cover of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment Machine gun section’s Lewis guns as well as four Vickers guns of the 1st Light Horse Brigade Machine gun Squadron who did valuable work protecting the charging men until gaining the Turkish works.

      The 1st company (with the section of the 4th company) under Lieutenant Bill Cashman were the first into the redoubt along with the 11th company under Captain Randolph Creswell who set about clearing the trench, only few of the Turks were prepared to fight it out as they appeared just as fatigued as our men. During the charge Lieutenant John Williams 4th Company was wounded along with a many men from the 11th and 1st companies including the Schuyler brothers from 11th company and Lieutenant Cashman’s batman Bert Hopkinson who had been shot multiple times as he tried to take photo’s of the charge. One of the lucky soldiers was Pat Doyle 4th Company, who on jumping into the Turkish’s trench found his rifle empty and grabbed the firearm of a Turkish soldier preparing to shoot him down, only his weapon was also empty and all Pat received was a burnt hand from the hot gun barrel as he took the weapon from the surprised Turkish soldier.

      As the men sorted the mess out in the redoubt, an intense fire was still coming from redoubt No 1 across the wadi to the south east. The captured Turks were found to be just as thirsty as our men and pressure was applied to the remainder of the redoubts to increase there will to give in. In all there were 3 officers and 92 men taken prisoner and clearing the redoubt was completed by 2.30 pm.

      This first foot in the door was just what General Chauvel was after and he quickly sent a report to Chetwode that the battle was no longer in doubt of victory and asked to dispatch a water column to meet him on the return. In fact around this time the attacks by our troops on redoubts No 3 by the New Zealand Mounted Brigade and No 6 by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade were progressing as the Turks was now showing signs of collapse.

      These attacks at 2.30 pm had the Wellington Mounted Regiment, the 8th and 9th Light Horse regiments still around 500 yards from their objectives, while the Canterbury Mounted Regiment was a little closer, these regiments now took time to reassess their positions and resupply with ammunition before the final push to their objectives. All Troops and Machine Gun sections had expended much of their ammunition during the advance and full magazines were required for the final assault.

      In the meantime in redoubt No 2 the 3rd Light Horse Regiment and the 1st and 11th companies lined the trenches taking the Turks in redoubt’s No 1 and No 3 under fire as the 6th, 14th and 15th companies were directed towards the centre of the village. The 12th company was committed at this time only it failed to get into action before the battle had ended and only provided support to the advancing companies. The reserve ammunition was also brought up as many of the weapons of the 3rd Battalion needed resupply.

      This last advance by the Camel Brigade into the town was still under a heavy cross fire from the remaining redoubts particularly from redoubt No 1 across the wadi and the 14th Company was severely hit losing Private Norman Huon killed while Corporal Percy Butcher was mortally wounded. The advance was helped by the use of the company Lewis guns under Sergeant Francis Fitzhardinge who was active in using his guns to support the attack until he was wounded.

      It was around 3.20 pm that sections of the 1st and 11th Companies moved into the wadi to provide more direct fire support to the attack on the No 1 Redoubt as the Light Horse moved into position to assault.

      Around 4 pm both A and C Squadron of the 3rd Light Horse Regiment had moved to help the 2nd Light Horse Regiment in their assault on redoubt No 1 which with the advance by the camel companies and fire from the guns the last flames of resistance were failing.

      It was also at this time that the capture of redoubt No 3 and No 6 by the New Zealand Mounted Brigade and the 3rd Light Horse Brigade was successful with a charge by these regiments which took these redoubts with many prisoners only cost was high in the 8th Light Horse Regiment many casualties.

      At 4.20 pm redoubt No 1 was finally captured by the 1st Light Horse Brigade with a charge by Major William Markwell and Troops of A and B Squadron 2nd Light Horse and A and C Squadron of the 3rd Light Horse regiments. It was here that Khadir Bey commander of the Turkish garrison was taken prisoner, of whom a surrender was promptly guaranteed, only until that happened and the word was passed to the other redoubts the advance would continue as elements of the New Zealand Mounted and 3rd Light Horse Brigades moved through the eastern end of the village and across the wadi to attack the southern redoubts and assist the 10th Light Horse Regiment, during which Lieutenant Johnstone of the 8th Squadron Canterbury Mounted Regiment took the four gun battery of Turkish artillery. This also allowing the lead companies of the Camel Brigade to complete their attack into the western end of the village and by 4.30 pm all resistance was ended.

      The victory now allowed General Chauvel to dispatch those troops not needed back to El Arish while a number of Regiments cleared the battlefield of prisoners and war material. Those returning met the supply column on the track allowing them to water and rest while the remainder of the troops cleared the battlefield and buried the dead. Together over 1282 prisoners including the commanding officer and two Battalion commanders were taken while 97 bodies were buried of the Turks.  The total casualties for the Anzac Mounted Division were given as 146 of which 5 officers and 17 men were killed most of who fell to the 8th Light Horse Regiment.

      The Camel Brigade officially reported 2 men killed and 1 officer and 26 men wounded of whom one died of wounds.

      The records show the Australians in the Camel Battalion’s lost 1 man killed with 1 officer and 19 men wounded of which 1 man died from wounds.

      The 15th NZ Company accounts report 15 men wounded for the battle only records show four men are confirmed, while the casualties in the British companies were not recorded, only the 6th company came into action and was not seriously engaged.

  Rafa
    From NZHistory.govt.nz:
      The senior commanders of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force (EEF) were greatly encouraged by the apparent ease with which the garrison at Magdhaba had been destroyed. They now decided to mount a raid against the last significant Ottoman presence in the Sinai – the Ottoman garrison at Rafah. This involved much more risk than the attack on Magdhaba, because Rafah straddled the Sinai–Palestine border and was connected by road to Gaza, where the bulk of the Ottoman Fourth Army was gathering.

      The Sinai railway had not yet advanced far enough to allow large numbers of infantry to be brought across the desert from El Arish to attack Rafah. The British would once again have to rely on their mounted troops. If these failed to capture Rafah quickly they would risk being overwhelmed by large Ottoman forces sent from Gaza. A key factor in the British gamble was the hope that the Ottoman garrison would have little stomach for a close-quarters fight. In this, the attackers were to be sorely disappointed.

      On 7 January 1917 the Anzac Mounted Division was ordered to assemble at Sheikh Zowaiid, 16 km from Rafah, to prepare for the attack. The commander of the EEF raiding force, General Philip Chetwode, also had at his disposal the British 5th Mounted Brigade, the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade and a small British armoured car detachment. Against this force the Ottoman Turkish garrison could muster three battalions of the 31st Infantry Regiment, a mountain artillery battery (four guns) and small cavalry and camelry detachments – a total strength of just over 2000 men. These troops were well entrenched just south-west of Rafah village, occupying a large earthen fort complex known as ‘the Reduit’ which was protected by a semi-circle of three separate trench systems. There was little natural cover in the approaches to these defences and Ottoman machine-gun nests were well sited with good fields of fire. The only positive feature from the attacker’s point of view was the complete absence of barbed wire surrounding them.

      After two days of preparation and reconnaissance, Chetwode’s force was ready to launch its attack. In the early hours of 9 January his troops moved out under cover of darkness. The basic plan called for the complete and rapid encirclement of Rafah by horsemen and cameleers, followed by simultaneous assaults from all sides. The New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade was charged with carrying out the most daring part of this plan: sweeping around behind Rafah in a wide arc to cut it off from the road to Khan Yunis and Gaza, then attacking the Reduit from the rear. In carrying out this movement the New Zealanders inadvertently became the first EEF soldiers to cross the frontier into Ottoman Palestine. The Auckland Mounted Rifles did so just before dawn, with the rest of the brigade soon following. Once all the mounted brigades were in position, the attack began at 9.30 a.m. A half-hour artillery bombardment was followed by the first assaults on the Ottoman trenches.

      Major James McCarroll led the 3rd and 4th squadrons of the Auckland Mounted Rifles into battle:

      We went off at a trot. As we neared the position, the shelling and machine gun fire increased. Our pace increased to a steady gallop. The horses seemed to enter into the spirit of the job, and … we galloped on over green crops. It was a beautiful sight, the lines regular just like on parade. We raced over an outer trench and a number of Turks surrendered. An officer and three or four men [ran] back [towards] their units. I … galloped after them, drawing my sword. I induced them to halt and return to us. One of them caught my horse by the bridle but I hit him on the back of the neck with the sword back. The Aucklands cleared another line of incomplete trenches, capturing more prisoners and a machine gun post. [1]

      Most of the attacking troops had dismounted about 600 m from the Ottoman lines. It quickly became clear that crossing this gap and overrunning the defences would be no easy task. By midday the attackers were more or less pinned down by the relentless artillery, machine-gun and rifle fire. It was also clear that – unlike their counterparts at Magdhaba – the Ottoman garrison was determined to fight. Chetwode now threw in his reserve brigades and ordered his commanders to redouble their efforts.

      As the afternoon wore on the attackers made only slow progress in reaching and reducing the defences, with the Ottoman Turks resisting fiercely. By now the danger that an Ottoman relief force would arrive from Gaza was increasing. Sure enough, just after 4 p.m. scouts reported that Turkish infantry were advancing through Khan Yunis. Chetwode reluctantly decided that he had no choice but to call off the attack and retreat.

      Just as Chetwode began to issue the order to retreat, the New Zealanders, who had swept through Rafah village that morning and been engaged in the fight for the Reduit and a small hill known as Point 265 ever since, finally broke through the Ottoman defences.

      The three regiments moved as one, covered by a portion of each regiment. The glistening steel, the dark forms on the green slopes with not a bit of cover. Steady as a rock. Here and there a man dropped. … Then the whole line [got] up as one man for the final rush, firing had ceased. It was here we got a number of casualties. Oh, that picture will never fade from my memory. Men fell quickly, the others pressed on, and with a cheer they reached the top of the hill where they had a business interview with the Turk. … The appearance of our brigade on top of the hill altered the whole position, and in ten minutes the Turk was beaten. [2]

      With two bayonet charges they crossed the last of the open ground and captured both Ottoman positions after a brief hand-to-hand fight. This opened the way for the other attacking brigades to outflank and break into the rest of the Ottoman trenches.

      Chetwode quickly cancelled his order and his brigade commanders renewed their assaults. Within an hour the Ottoman defences had been completely overrun. Even then Chetwode had to move quickly to make sure his men gathered up all their wounded and Ottoman prisoners and moved out before the relief force arrived. As they were pulling out, troopers of the Wellington Mounted Rifles came under fire from Ottoman advance parties. It had been a close-run thing, but thanks to the New Zealand Mounted Rifles, the Battle of Rafah had ended in another victory for the EEF.

      [1] James McCarroll diary, 9 January 1917, quoted in Terry Kinloch, Devils on horses: in the words of the Anzacs in the Middle East 1916–19, Exisle, Auckland, 2007, p. 136.

      [2] McCarroll diary, Kinloch, p. 142.

    From: With the Cameliers in Palestine:

      From Christmas onward, reconnaissances by the mounted forces were constantly carried out towards the east and south from El Arish.

      On the border line between Egypt and Palestine, near the coast, the Turks had entrenched a commanding hill at Rafa about two hundred feet higher than the surrounding country, with the ground sloping away gradually from it on all sides. The country stretching to the north and south and inland consisted of a slightly undulating plain, while sandhills fringing the coast lay a short distance to the west; and the whole of this plain was under observation from the Turkish position.

      The main Turkish army lay some twelve miles farther north, along the south side of the Wadi Ghuzzi, and the post at Rafa was an advanced one which would block the advance of the British army if it attempted an attack on the main Turkish force.

      A night raid on Rafa, thirty miles away from El Arish, was decided on by General Chetwode, and once more the Camel Brigade took part in a long night ride, followed by an all-day strenuous but successful fight, with another long ride back in the dark to its base.

      The attacking force consisted of the Anzac Mounted Division (less the Second A.L.H. Brigade), the Fifth Mounted Brigade (Yeomanry), and the Camel Brigade, the whole force being under the command of General Chetwode in person.

      The column left El Arish at 4 p.m. on January 8, and wound its way through the sandhills lying parallel to the coast, but by midnight the nature of the ground altered to a sandy soil covered with a light coating of grass, with here and there patches of cultivation which was much appreciated by the mounts whenever a halt was made.

      Ten miles from Rafa a native village called Sheikh Zowaiid was passed, and all wheeled vehicles except the field-guns were ordered to be left there, a decision which later on affected the replenishing of the supplies of ammunition of some of the artillery and machine-guns during the battle.

      By daylight on January 9 the force arrived before the Turkish position at Rafa. The New Zealand Mounted Brigade under Brigadier-General Chaytor was ordered to make a detour round the right of the position, to attack it from the north. In carrying out this movement the New Zealanders crossed the political boundary between Egypt and Palestine, and therefore were the first members of the British army in this campaign to enter the Promised Land, and to pass from the continent of Africa into Asia. In the battle that followed the New Zealanders carried out their part in Asia, while the rest of the army was fighting in Africa.

      The two Australian Light Horse Brigades, the First and the Third, attacked from the east and south-east, the Camel Brigade from the south, and the Yeomanry Brigade from the west, while the New Zealand Mounted Brigade attacked the northern approaches to the position and cut off the communication of the Turks with their base.

      Although the whole enemy position was surrounded the attacking force made very little impression on it as the day wore on. The entrenchments were well placed, the main redoubts dominating the country on all sides, while outer trenches with excellent fields of fire, concealed the position of the front line of the Turks who swept every yard of approach with their rifles.

      The 15th N.Z. Camel Company had been transferred to the First Battalion I.C.C. in January, and took part in this action as a unit of that body. The men dismounted under shell fire some three and a half miles from the enemy position, and the 15th Company advanced as the first wave of the Battalion’s attack. The whole of the Camel Brigade present had been thrown into the attack, and the troops, during the day, attempted to work their way forward by crawling or by making short rushes over the bare level ground. By 2 p.m. the advance was held up by severe rifle and machine-gun fire, and the position was being enfiladed from concealed positions on the right. During this advance the 15th Company lost its popular O.C., Captain J. G. McCallum, who had been in command of the Company since its formation.

      All forenoon and up to the middle of the afternoon, the Turkish position was subjected to a hot fire from our artillery, machine-guns and rifles, but no impression appeared to be made on it, and at 3.30 p.m. the Inverness Battery, which was working in conjunction with the N.Z. Brigade, ran out of ammunition and was withdrawn from the attack. About this time word was received at Headquarters that strong Turkish reinforcements were approaching from the north from the direction of the village of Khan Yunus.

      The supply of ammunition for the machine-guns of the New Zealanders was running short, and some guns were out of action on that account. Major A Wilkie, the Quartermaster of the Wellington Mounted Rifles, hearing of this, commandeered the use of the nearest cable-waggon back at Sheik Zowaiid, emptied out its contents, filled it with small-arms ammunition, and personally conducted it at a gallop to the New Zealand Brigade in time to enable the machine-gunners to take an effective part in the final advance on the main redoubt. The ammunition supply of the Camel Brigade, including that of the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery attached to it, being carried by camel transport, did not come under the order which held all wheeled transport back at Sheik Zowaiid, and so all arms of this unit were able to carry on during the whole of the engagement.

      Well on in the afternoon, in view of the difficulties of the situation, General Chetwode, after consulting with General Chauvel, decided to break off the action, and retire, but before this movement was begun, Brig.-Gen. Chaytor on the opposite side of the position ordered the New Zealand Brigade to attack the Turkish redoubt, and with their advance skilfully covered by machine-gun and artillery fire, the New Zealanders swept across the open grassy slope over a mile wide, and captured the main redoubt. When this success was noticed the order for retirement was recalled, and all Brigades pressed on the attack, and one by one the various redoubts were captured.

      The Cameliers had suffered fairly heavily during the day, but had worked their way gradually forward. The last forty yards were carried in one rush, and as our men approached the trenches the Turks held up white flags, and the strongly held position was won. The Camel Brigade here captured five officers and two hundred and fourteen other ranks.

      The total number of prisoners taken at Rafa amounted to 1,635, while the losses on the British side were 487 all told. The casualties of the 15th N.Z. Company I.C.C. consisted of one officer and two other ranks killed, and nineteen other ranks wounded.

      For their conduct in this engagement two members of the 15th Company received decorations, Sergeant Trott being awarded the Medaille Militaire, and Trooper J. Marwick the Military Medal.

      Darkness fell before the captured position was fully cleaned up, so a force was left in charge, and to act as a rearguard should the Turkish reinforcements make an attack. The main body then retired to Sheikh Zowaiid which was reached after midnight, and next day the whole force returned to El Arish.

      The Battle of Rafa was the last major action fought on Egyptian territory. The British army had reached the border of the Holy Land, and henceforth the campaign became a contest to decide who was to have possession of the Land of the Bible.

      Although the main Turkish army had been driven off the Sinai Peninsula, there were still small posts here and there which were a menace to the British flank or its lines of communication. One of these posts was at Bir el Hassana about thirty miles south-west of Magd-haba, on the central road across the Peninsula. It was decided to clear up this position, so in February the Second Battalion (British) of the Imperial Camel Brigade, and one section of the Hong Kong Battery were told off to accomplish this. The 15th Company moved to Magdhaba and stayed there in reserve while this operation took place, and then returned to its former camping ground near El Arish.

    From a Stever Becker forum post:
      Mates,

      Almost time for the Rafa battle 100 years on.

      Rafa saw the same tactic's used at Magdhaba by surrounding the garrison and attacked by dismounted formations.

      At the end I will place some details from our Turkish enemy on what they saw during that day.

      Again some thing I wrote many years ago on this battle, sorry but again mainly on the Camel Corps;

      The Battle of RAFA
      By Steve Becker

      In the weeks following the successful capture of Magdhaba the Camel Brigade (hastily assembled in December) went through a period of training and reorganization. Part of this reorganisation was to place all British companies together into one battalion and Australian and New Zealand companies into two Battalions. General Smith still had to rotate his Companies with the Western Frontier Force and the Canal defence as new companies were formed and attached to gain experience with his new Battalions and the newly formed 4th Camel Regiment had marched into Abbassia for training in November, this constituted the increasing importance of the Camel Corps in the defence of Egypt by General Murray.

      During this time the Brigade continued to send out patrols into the surrounding desert searching for Bedouin who acting on Turkish orders spied on the Allied troops around El Arish. One of the patrol areas was at Lahfan Post south of El Arish where a camel company was placed along the Wadi El Arish to warn of any approach of the Turks from that direction. The Brigade was inspected by General’s Cherwode, Dobell and Chauvel on the 28 December where they complemented the men on the part they played during the battle on the 23 December and the men gave the leaders a march pass mounted on their camels.

      The Camel Brigade at this time was composed of the following troops;

      Camel Bde HQ   Gen Smith VC

      1st Anzac Battalion   Maj Langley
      1st Co   Capt Wright
      3rd Co   Lt Norris
      4th Co   Capt Denson
      15th NZ Co   Capt McCallum

      2nd British Battalion   Maj Bassett
      5th Co   Capt Wilson
      6th Co   Capt Pettit
      7th Co   Capt Deas
      8th Co   Not with unit

      3rd Battalion   Maj Huddlestone
      11th Co   Capt Creswell
      12th Co   Capt Smith
      14th Co   Capt Tolmer
      16th Co   Not with unit

      HK&S Battery   Maj Moore
      1/1st Welsh FAmb
      1 sect 2/1 Cheshire FCE and
      ASC Column   Lt Drake RE

      On the 4 January 1917 Major Hubert Jervoise Huddlestone MC arrived from the Dorset Regiment where he had been serving with the Egyptian Camel Corps in the Darfur area of the Sudan and assumed command of the 3rd Battalion replacing Captain Wright who renewed his command of the 1st Company as it, with the 15th NZ Company returned to the 1st Anzac Battalion.

      The Allied Air force was continuously active during this period undertaking long flight’s into the desert and carrying out reconnaissance patrols towards the border where it was reported that the Turks still occupied El Magruntein a small police post just south of Rafa along the Palestine-Egypt border, where the Turks through political reasons were forced to maintain a garrison in the Sinai.

      To defend Palestine was the 3rd Turkish Division under Colonel Refet Bey who had to cover two major points of entry, the first and longer southern route along the border was placed the 32nd Infantry Regiment at El Auja to cover the rail line to Beersheba this was supported by a mixed force of the Turkish Camel Regiment and a Battery of Artillery. While a similar force of the 31st Regiment was at Rafa covering the Northern route. In reserve was the 160th Regiment in between Gaza and Beersheba at Tell el Seria while units of the 3rd Cavalry Division covered Gaza.

      The Turkish garrison at Rafa under Lieutenant Colonel Ismail Hakki Bey commanding the 31st Infantry Regiment consisted of his own 1st and 2nd Battalions 31st Infantry Regiment, 3rd Division (less the 5th and 7th Companies), including around 6 to 10 MG's from the MG Companies of the 31st Regiment and the 80th Regiment (less gun or guns lost at Magdhaba) and a mixed MG Company from the 3rd Cavalry Division, a Turkish camel Corps platoon and dismounted Camel Company (200 men), a Gendarme Company (30 men) and part of a hospital unit. The force was supported by four mountain guns of the 8th mountain Battery 1st Artillery Regiment, which was solidly entrenched in well defended positions around El Magruntein. The veteran 31st Regiment was a capable unit having taken part in the attack on the canal in August and had been selected as the rearguard stopping the attack on Mazar in September and had escaped any major hardship. The total garrison had some 1875 men of whom 402 men were non combatants.

      On the 28 December General Philip Chetwode commanding the Desert Column at El Arish proposed a raid on the isolated garrison at Rafa which would be similar to that employed by General Charles Chauvel at Magdhaba, this offered an excellent chance of capturing the position before the horses would require water. This plan was accepted by General Archibald Murray on the proviso that no undue risk should be run during the attack.

      The troops employed in the capture Rafa would come from the Desert Column and consist of the Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division under General Chauvel, composed of the 1st and 3rd Australian Light Horse Brigades, the New Zealand Mounted Brigade, 5th British Mounted Yeomanry Brigade and the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade, supported by the 7th Light Car Patrol.

      On the 28 December the 1st Australian Light Horse Brigade carried out a reconnaissance to Bir el Burj, 12 miles along the El Arish - Rafa road and another on the 30 December to Sheikh Zowaiid. These operations hardened the troops and prepared them for the hardships ahead as well as discovering the lack of Turkish troops covering the main defences at Rafa.

      On the 7 January orders were issued for a concentration at Sheikh Zowaiid of the Desert Column and the advance force left El Arish at 4 am on the 8 January with the 5th Mounted Brigade leading which captured Sheikh Zowaiid by 10 am.

      The Camel brigade (less the 14th company still on outpost duty at Lahfan Post and 8th and 16th Companies had still not arrived), was composed of only nine companies, who held a sports meeting on the 8 January, which finished in time for the troops to parade at 2 pm and depart around 4 pm with full equipment for Sheikh Zowaiid. The brigade pushed on slowly surrounded by the swift moving regiments of the Light Horse and Mounted Rifles where at 9 pm the moon came out displaying the promised land ahead, the troops were heartened to find the desert sands of the Sinai give way to the grassy plains of the land of Palestine as the troops arrived at Shekh Zowaiid around midnight.

      During the night Lieutenant Colonel Hakki Bey had received Lieutenant Serif Guralp, Adjutant to Refet Bey commander of the 3rd Turkish Division, with an order to withdrawal to Khan Yunis the following day and position his regiment with the 160th Regiment at Selale to await an attack by the British, if he was attacked at Rafa in the meanwhile the 160th Regiment would then move to support him. Hakki Bey left the arrangements for the move till morning little knowing that the Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division were approaching.

      At 1 am on the 9 January the advance proceeded the remaining 25 miles to Rafa with the Brigades of the Australian and New Zealand Division followed by the Camel Brigade at 1.30 am then the artillery. The 1st Light Horse brigade leading pushed well ahead over running a Bedouin patrol capturing it to a man.

      At 3.30 am the force reached Pt 250 four and a half miles south of Rafa and two Turks on patrol were captured by the 3rd Light Horse brigade yet not before they signalled Rafa by flare, which luckily was not observed.

      By 5.15 am the New Zealand brigade, secured Karm Ibn Muslah yet the local Arab population signalled the garrison at Rafa alerting the Turks to their presence, this town was found to be an excellent position for the Headquarters of the Australian and New Zealand Division and was used as an assembly point for the arriving Brigades.

      While the concentration was underway, the Camel brigade had dropped off 3/4 of a mile to the west before this town and moved into an assembly area at 5.30 am while the other brigades moved into their positions.  The Camel brigade like the light horse left one man in four to hold the animals and all nine companies were dismounted and the animals moved to safety.  The brigade was greeted at 8.40 am by Turkish shell fire which landed around the position and despite there having the range marked down too within an inch they failed to hit any of the troops yet gave warning of what was installed for the day. The troops watched the spectacle while moving up and wondered about their chances attacking the Turks formidable defences over such open ground which as the sun came up showed their extent and the rapid movement of troops over a wide area as they deployed into position.

      The Battle plan called for an assault by the Camel Brigade against the southern most defence of El Magruntein known as the B series of redoubts which were made up of four major works numbered from left to right as one to four with B 4 Redoubt the outermost to the southeast, all were in support of each other and with more than 2000 yards of exposed ground around them made any movement towards these redoubts vulnerable to their supported fire, the B redoubts were occupied with a strong garrison of more than 300 to 400 men with two machine guns, and artillery was within supporting range. At a distance in front of the redoubts the Turks had placed a number of snipers in spider holes which could be supported from the main trench where these men could inflict casualties on the attacking troops and break up their formations before reaching the main defences; these would become all too familiar to the troops later in the campaign.

      General Clarence Smith was aware of the difficult task ahead and organized his brigade with the strong 1st Anzac Battalion under Major George Langley to attack the B 4 redoubt which would be supported on the right flank by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade (during their own attack on the C series of redoubts), in support would be the 2nd (British) Battalion under Major John Basset and the 3rd Battalion under Major Hubert Huddlestone was held in reserve.

      The Camel Brigade had formed up into battle formation after having dismounted more than 4000 yards from the Turkish redoubts as the lead companies advanced in single files to the start line where by 9 am the attacking companies where assembled. The Somerset Battery set up to fire on the C series of redoubts in support of the 3rd Light Horse Brigade while on the far left the 5th Yeomanry Brigade was to attack the A series of redoubts with the Warwickshire Yeomanry Regiment directed towards the B 1 and B 2 redoubts. The Hong Kong and Singapore Battery moved forward to a position 4500 yards from the Turks and came into action to give the Brigade support with their small calibre mountain guns.

      At 9.30 am the artillery commenced firing on the Turkish redoubts and during this half hour preparation fire the attacking troops moved slowly forward. The 1st Anzac Battalion attacked, with the 15th (New Zealand) company leading under Captain John McCallum and the 3rd company under Lieutenant Arthur Norris in support while two sections of the 1st company under Captain Charles Wright and the 4th company under Captain Herbert Denson were retained in reserve, the remaining two sections from the 1st company were detached to protect both the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery and 1/1st Welch Field Ambulance.

      The assaulting companies deployed with two sections up and two in support with their Lewis guns to the flanks, the men advanced spread out in artillery formation then moved rapidly into line extended before the companies started advancing by section rushes however with more than 2000 yards of open ground the going was slow and under constant machine gun and rifle fire.

      The Turkish fire, as at Magdhaba was strong yet very inaccurate with most of the bullets passing overhead until the troops had closed up on the main defences then the fire would become more accurate.  During the 1st Battalion’s attack the advance was to have been coordinated with the 9th Light Horse Regiment yet due to the distances and Turkish fire this did not happen instead both units attacked their objectives separately, this was to have tragic consequences later in the morning for both units.

      Around 11 am the companies still advancing in section rushes reached a small sand ridge about 800 yards from the B 4 redoubt and there took temporary shelter from the heavy Turkish fire directed at them, Captain McCallum took this time to reorganize his men as they had become mixed during the advance. When the company commenced to move forward again they had advanced only a few yards when the men were engulfed in a murderous cross fire from both the B and C series of redoubts as the troops endeavoured to go forward.

      In defiance of this fire the kiwis slowly made their way across this isolated sand ridge towards the enemies trenches yet more men fell hit by machine gun fire and snipers hidden in small holes in advance of the main defence, Captain John McCallum a Solicitor from Christchurch NZ and a well-liked Officer, Commanding 15th company was shot and mortally wounded as the fire forced the remainder of the company to fall back to the ridge and safety.

      Shells from supporting artillery cheered the troops, which appeared to them to be smashing the Turkish trenches yet any man still trying to advance were greeted by a hail of fire both from the front and flank as they became exposed to enfilade fire from the C 3 redoubt on the right killing Private Stuart Kidd and mortally wounding Private William Metcalfe of the 15th company as many men fell wounded. Seeing the madness of continuing the troops were ordered to lie down to find what cover they could, most scraped sand in front of them too hide behind and there were numerous wounded where Turkish snipers took great pleasure at picking off individual men including the wounded.

      Around this time the 3rd company which had been following the 15th into the fire storm joined up with the hard-pressed New Zealanders and quickly reinforced the firing line and extended the flanks bringing fire onto the Turkish trenches, this directly brought the enemies guns onto the company and the casualties began to mount, Privates John Vanstone and Roy Gallwey seeing the suffering of the wounded found a stretcher and under heavy fire evacuated many of the wounded men. Meanwhile Private Edward Sutton was knocked unconscious by the concussion of an exploding shell when he came to he was suffering from shell shock and his mates comforted him as they waited for a chance to remove him.

      For four hours the troops remained stranded in front of the Turkish works where the only comfort was from the supporting artillery fire and while the Lewis gunners did good work keeping the Turks to their trenches, one gunner Private Joe Paul was shot in the head and killed doing this vital work as was Lieutenant Harry Lindford, a popular young officer from NSW who was shot in the chest soon after him, Private Roy Bailey was also shot in the abdomen during the advance and later died of wounds.

      By 11 am the 1st  Anzac Battalion was checked and Major Langley committed the two sections of the 1st company to help, they pushed promptly onward towards the exposed companies sheltering in front of the Turkish redoubt and could make only a limited advance before being forced to go to ground and join the cowering 3rd and 15th company in the sand were exposed to the enemies fire they soon had many casualties, these  included Sergeant Peter Foster and Private Phil Holmes killed with Corporal George Wilson mortally wounded and Private Arthur Woodcock late of the 13th Battalion who had been shot through the bowel later dying in the 1st Light Horse Field Ambulance.

      At 11.30 am General Smith ordered forward the 2nd Battalion to support the stalled 1st Battalion and the 5th company under Captain Charles Wilson led by the 6th under Captain Hubert Pettit and 7th company under Captain Edwin Deas forward, Major Buxton deploying the 5th company to the left rear of the 1st Battalion and there joined in providing fire support by extending the firing line to the left of the 3rd and 15th Company’s onto the Turkish trenches while the 6th and 7th company remained to the rear until ordered forward at 1 pm.

      By 12.15 pm General Smith had observed that his line was being cut to pieces by the fire from the Turkish redoubts on the flanks and knew he would have to extend the firing line further to support the isolated companies by taking more redoubts under fire.

      The remaining companies of the 2nd Battalion were then committed and the artillery was increased to help. To assist the light guns of the Hong Kong and Singapore battery the Somerset and Leicester batteries were added and at 1 pm the 2nd Battalion moved forward the 6th company under Captain Pettit and two sections of the 7th company under Captain Deas to take the B 3 redoubt under fire.  The English Cameleers advanced in two waves of three lines by companies with the 6th on the left of the stranded 5th company and the 7th on the left of the 6th company, after quickly moving across the exposed surface they soon came under heavy fire from B 4 and B 2 redoubts forcing the companies to deploy short on their right and like the 1st Anzac Battalion could make no progress against the heavy cross fire on the exposed sand. Captain Deas ordered his men to find cover yet continued to make steady progress forward until becoming bogged down in the sand and where they to had to endure and return fire at their antagonists. Thus the firing line was now extended to the left and were we could now bring a cross fire onto B 4  redoubt, the troops also found that B 3 redoubt was not held in strength by the Turkish with only a thin screen of rifleman as its garrison.

      During this time the 4th Company under Captain Denson was committed after midday with the hope of extending and reinforcing the 1st Battalions firing line and soon became the focal point of the Turks fire, and quickly lost Private David Farthing mortally wounded and more than 11 men casualties before joining the remainder of the Battalion in the sand entangled under a perilous fire.

      Around 11 am the 3rd Battalion had also been brought up from reserve and formed a line to the rear of the 2nd Battalion after its companies had been engaged in the action on B 3.  At 1.15 pm the 11th company under Captain Randolph Creswell was committed to the left of the stalled 2nd Battalion its mission was to both extend the firing line and to effect a junction with the 5th Yeomanry Brigade which had not been seen to have engage the B1 redoubt, yet once the company began to advance they abruptly ran into a heavy and concentrated fire from the B 1 and B 2 redoubts which stopped any thought of progress and the company quickly joined the remainder of the Brigade in the sand as this move was not pushed forward.

      Major Hubert Huddlestone then brought up the 12th company under Captain George Smith at 2 pm to lengthened his firing line yet again was frustrated by the Turkish and had to expose himself to the Turkish fire to inspire the men of the inexperienced 12th Company, in the end the company was forced to stop well to the rear of the 11th company and was not heavily committed.

      Around 4.30 the Australian and New Zealand Division was in trouble as the Turkish defences were resistant to the attack of the combined forces and with Turkish reinforcements, including the 160th Regiment, were seen approaching from Gaza, and with the capture of a number of German officers, including Lieutenant Becke, and men from a machine gun company outside Rafa by the New Zealand Brigade, soon forced General Chetwode to consider a withdrawal just as General Chauval had been forced to contemplate at Magdhaba. General Chetwode now proposed that the attack be broken off and waited to consult with higher command while the 5th Yeomanry Brigade was withdrawn from the area of the B 1 and the A series of redoubts.  While this was being decided news came in of the success of both the New Zealand and Camel brigades.

      After 4 pm General Smith was concerned by the lack of progress of his forward Battalions and conferring with his senior officers organized one more attack which was to be carried out against the B 2 redoubt that had not been engaged as yet and cooperation and support were arranged with the 5th Mounted Brigade. This attack was to be carried out by two companies of the 3rd Battalion and one company from the 2nd Battalion under the combined command of Major Huddlestone and using the 11th and 12th companies as an axis the 7th company moved in behind them joining up beside the 12th company. It was during this redeployment that orders were received from General Chetwode that units of the 5th Mounted Brigade were to retire leaving the Camel companies flank exposed and to attack alone.

      All troops were guided into position by 4.20 pm by Major Langley, when all watches in the assaulting companies were synchronized. At this time the 12th and 7th company worked their way forward by crawling on their hands and knees too within assaulting distance with the 11th company under Captain Creswell in support. The combined Lewis gun teams under Lieutenant’s Leslie Bell and John Davidson, who with Sergeant Bert Clarke from the 4th Company, were detached and set up on the flank where they had good observation over the Turkish trenches, and poured a deadly fire at the Turks, which could be clearly seen by the rows of bayonets sticking up from their trenches as if to signal to the cameleers not to come any further, as the assault troops slowly made their way towards the Turkish line. The remainder of the 1st Battalion and 2nd Battalion’s concentrated all their fire on the B 4 redoubt and a section of two guns of the Hong Kong and Singapore battery were moved up to within 30 yards of the 1st Battalion’s firing line, to add to the fusillade on the B 4 redoubt, so as to reduce the cross fire into the assaulting companies.

      Around 4.35 pm with only 40 yards to the Turkish trench, the cameleers rose from the hot sand and made a swift rush with the bayonet at the stunned Turks, the men let out a loud cheer as they ran towards the Turks who had only time to fire a few shots before the cameleers were among them and just as we reached the enemies trenches white flags began to appear. Captain George Smith an accountant from Narrabri NSW commanding the 12th company was shot and killed on reaching the enemies trenches, and a short yet deadly fight followed, as not all the Turks were prepared to surrender and the bayonet was used freely by Australian and British troops in clearing the trenches, the 12th company lost Corporal Joseph Murray, reported felled by a German NCO (there were no Germans in the defences at El Magruntein) along with Private Bill Whildon were killed, and Private’s John Campbell and George Isles were mortally wounded, in the close quarter fighting during this bloody contest, while Neil McBride had been shot in the groin some yards from the trenches. Sergeant Robert Coombe of the 7th company with great dash captured a portion of trench and 40 Turkish prisoners, losing Sergeant James Wilson and Private Allan Craig killed, and soon the entire redoubt was in their hands.

      The quick seizure of the B 2 redoubt enabled the 3rd Battalion to consolidate the position and allowed the troops to push on and apprehend the B 3 and B 4 redoubts.  The 11th company assumed the lead capturing many Turks with the loss of only a few men, Sergeant Edward Lynch a Carpenter from West Wylong NSW and well liked soldier was killed trying to take a Turkish machine gun to secure the advance.  Also, killed were Privates Francis Heaney and Frank Morse-Kincaid while Privates Herbert Gyler and John Drage were mortally wounded.

      With the 3rd Battalions assault a success the companies of the 1st and 2nd Battalions rose and advanced on the readouts to complete the capture supported by fire from Sergeant Bertram Clark with his Lewis gun teams who with other Lewis gun teams fired more than 9000 rounds of ammunition and shot down any Turks lifting his head above the trench top. There was little fight left in the Turks who after twenty hours in the trenches with little water under the merciless sun now surrendered in large numbers allowing all the trenches to be captured and cleared with little resistance by 4.50 pm. The Brigade had captured more than five officers and 219 other ranks and two Machine guns, all in the B series of Redoubts and an unknown number were killed, many more ran away only to be picked up by other units, few if any escaped.

      While the brigade concentrated a group of men from the 1st Anzac Battalion pushed on to the B series of redoubts and joined the 9th Light Horse in the C series of redoubts taking part with Captain John Chanter C Squadron in the capture of the battery of four Turkish mountain guns and a number of prisoners.

      Meanwhile the Warwickshire Yeomanry of the 5th Mounted Brigade on the left which had withdrawn on order earlier now returned too assisted the Camel Brigade in taking the B 1 redoubt where fighting continued with the Yeomanry for a further twenty minutes before its capture was effected. Allied records show that 320 prisoners were taken from the assault on the B1 and B2 redoubts by the Camel Brigade and Warwick Yeomanry

      The victory by General Chetwode and his men was soon in danger with Turkish reinforcements now approaching El Magruntein in force; detachments of the Wellington Regiment were in action delaying their advance as General Chetwode ordered all troops to withdraw as swiftly as possible. However before they could leave the field of battle had first to be cleared of wounded and prisoners also those who paid the price of victory hurriedly buried, it was getting dark as the cameleers slowly mounted their camels sadly there were many empty saddles as the brigade moved slowly back to Sheikh Zowaiid arriving around midnight where they rested for a few hours and a rum issue was passed around. Lieutenant Archie Campbell and a small party were ordered to return to El Magruntein at 3 am to bury Captain Smith and others who had been killed and who may have been overlooked, the bodies were found however their remains had been desecrated by Arab scavengers and the cameleers took a particular dislike to them and against British orders few when caught were released in one piece.

      However the Light Horse Victory was not complete as yet again they had failed to close the ring around the Turkish defences and a number of Turks escaped including most of the 31st Machine Gun Company to fight once more.

      In the morning of the 10 January the exhausted Brigade continued its move back to El Arish arriving at 2.30 pm.

      The total Camel Brigade casualties were reported in their War Diary as three officers and 60 other ranks killed or wounded.

      The records show the Australians of the 1st and 3rd Battalions had lost two officers (George Smith and Harry Linford) and nine other ranks killed and one officer and 42 men wounded of which seven men died of wounds.

      The New Zealanders of the 15th company reported the lost of one other rank killed (Stuart Kidd) and one officer and 18 men were wounded of who one officer (John McCallum) and one other rank died of wounds.

      The 2nd British Battalion casualties were not recorded, yet a search of records show three other ranks were killed in action and four other ranks died of wounds while the wounded were not recorded.

      One of the results of this battle for the Turkish Army was the destruction of the 31st Infantry Regiment, that was tempered by the poor showing of the 160th Regiment at Rafa which lead to its commander being sentenced to death for his failure to help the 31st Regiment, and the 160th Regiment was disbanded and reformed as the 31st Infantry Regiment and 1st Battalion 80th Regiment.

    From NZHistory.govt.nz:

       With the fall of Rafa the EEF had cleared the last Ottoman troops from the Sinai Peninsula and successfully concluded a campaign that had achieved all its objectives. The Suez Canal was safe from any possible Ottoman Turkish threat and the British were now poised to invade the Ottoman-held territory of Palestine.

Palestine Campaign
    From NZHistory.govt.nz:
      With the successful conclusion of the Sinai campaign the Egyptian Expeditionary Force (EEF) and its commander, Lieutenant-General Sir Archibald Murray, had achieved their original objective – securing the Suez Canal against any further threat of Turkish attack. This victory led to pressure from the British government, under a new Prime Minister, David Lloyd George, to invade Ottoman-controlled Palestine. Lloyd George was particularly impressed by the comparatively low casualties that had accompanied Murray’s victories in the desert, compared to the string of bloody failures suffered by the British Army on the Western Front in 1916.

      There was little understanding in London of the unique conditions of the Sinai campaign, especially the powerful operational constraints the lack of water placed on both sides. Despite having reached the edge of southern Palestine, Murray’s troops were still dependent on the Sinai railway and water pipeline for nearly all their supplies. Their Ottoman opponents were not.

      Murray’s mistake was to try to carry out his new orders without insisting on taking the time he needed to build up his forces and supplies. His first attack against Gaza, the traditional gateway to southern Palestine, ended in controversy and failure.

      On 26 March 1917 the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade all but captured the town, only to be ordered to withdraw as nightfall approached. The Second Battle of Gaza three weeks later was an even bigger disaster for Murray – a frontal attack by his infantry divisions resulted in some 6000 British casualties. This was not what Lloyd George had envisaged when he had championed the idea of a Palestine campaign. His government, embarrassed by the defeats, ensured that Murray was sacked shortly afterwards.

      The British made their third attempt to capture Gaza at the end of October 1917. The EEF’s new commander, Lieutenant-General Sir Edmund Allenby, had received much-needed reinforcements that brought its existing units up to full strength. Additional infantry, artillery and mounted units were also sent to Egypt from other fronts. This gave Allenby a core force of seven infantry and three mounted divisions, around which he reorganised his army in August.
      The EEF’s logistical set-up was also much improved. The Sinai railway had now reached El Arish. It carried 13 trains a day, and work had begun to double-track the line. Rail supplies were augmented by a coastal supply route from Egypt, using small surfboats to land cargoes from coastal vessels directly on the beaches around Deir el Belah. By these means a network of forward supply depots and ammunition dumps was built up close to the front line. The New Zealand Rarotongan Company was one of the units which created and maintained this network.

      The Turks had also been busy. They reinforced their defences around Gaza and extended them towards Beersheba, near the base of the Judean Hills. But Allenby, unlike Murray, had everything he needed, including time to put a clever deception plan into effect. The result was a brilliant victory in the Third Battle of Gaza (27 October – 7 November 1917) which broke the Ottoman lines and allowed Allenby to push his troops forward in pursuit for another month before the Turks were able to regroup. In that time the EEF captured the port of Jaffa, most of southern Judea and, on 9 December 1917, the city of Jerusalem. An impressed Lloyd George considered Jerusalem a ‘Christmas present for the British nation’.

      Allenby was eager to launch a new offensive as soon as possible. The EEF carried out a number of small-scale operations to improve their front-line positions – most notably the capture of Jericho, a bridgehead into the Jordan Valley, on 21 February 1918. A more ambitious large-scale raid on Amman a month later by the Anzac and British mounted troops ended in failure, as did a second raid across the Jordan at the end of April.

      The crisis sparked by the German offensive on the Western Front in late March saw many of Allenby’s most experienced infantry and artillery units hastily transferred to France. This meant that the EEF was unable to undertake any significant action in Palestine for the next six months. The gaps were slowly filled from the ranks of the Indian Army.

      Allenby made the most of this enforced break, preparing carefully for his final offensive, which is known as the Battle of Megiddo. This began on 19 September 1918. Within a fortnight three Ottoman field armies were destroyed, with the capture of 76,000 prisoners. Palestine, Jordan and southern Syria were conquered.

  Gaza I

    From With The Cameliers in Palestine:
      THE Turks had entrenched a position south of the Wadi Ghuzzi as if they intended to bar there the advance of the British into Palestine, and Sir Archibald Murray made arrangements to attack their position, but before he could do so the Turks retired to the northern side of the Wadi, and took up a position stretching from the coast near the town of Gaza, south-east to Beersheba, some thirty miles away. The position was well chosen as it occupied the higher ground sloping down to the Wadi and the slightly undulating country south of the latter place. Several strongly entrenched posts were established which completely dominated the ground over which the British would have to advance if a frontal attack in force were attempted.

      The Wadi was like the Wadi El Arish, a wide dry river-bed for the greater part of the year, with numerous tributary wadis running back well into the hills of Southern Judaea. Its bed was sandy or gravelly, its sides were steep clay banks, and its numerous branches cutting into the plain in all directions gave splendid places of concealment for troops lying in wait to surprise our patrols in this no man’s land. Here and there in the lower portion of its basin pools of water lasted through the summer season, an unusual sight in this land, and these formed convenient places for watering-horses and camels.

      In the earliest chapter of the Bible in which cities are first mentioned, Gaza is one of the first six, and is the only one of those named there that has existed continuously since that time, a matter of over four thousand years according to Bible chronology. This town has, as far back as recorded history goes, been the key to the southern entrance to Palestine. It is mentioned in the ancient inscriptions of the Pharaohs of Egypt, when Thothmes III overran Syria about the year 1500 b.c.

      Since then Gaza has figured in every invasion by land, of Egypt from the north, or of Palestine from the south. It has seen the coming and going of the Pharaohs of old, of the Assyrian and Persian invaders of Egypt, of Alexander the Great, of the Arab and Turkish hordes, of the Crusaders, and of Napoleon and his army in more modern times. And now it was to see the holding up of a British army, composed of units brought overseas from the opposite ends of the earth—England, Australia, New Zealand, with representatives also from the great Indian Empire, at the same place where Samson of old gave an exhibition of his strength while in the prime of life, and where later, as a blinded captive, he suffered at the hands of the Philistines, thousands of whom he is said to have destroyed when he ended his own miseries by death.

      Gaza is the only city that suffered material damage by siege during the Palestine campaign. Not only was harm done to it by the bombardment by the British, but the town was largely despoiled by the Turks themselves who freely used the materials from the buildings for military purposes in their defensive positions. The great mosque, Jami el Kebir, was used by the Turkish army during its occupation of the town as a storehouse for ammunition, and during a bombardment this store of explosives was detonated and the mosque was badly damaged.

      By the end of February the British force had advanced to Khan Yunus, and the railway and pipe line were being vigorously pushed along behind it. Owing to the different nature of the country over which the army was now operating, wheeled transport could again be used.

      General Murray decided to attempt another cutting-out expedition on a larger scale than before, and attempt to capture Gaza, and while the operations were in progress he established advance G.H.Q. in a railway carriage at El Arish. The 52nd Division (in reserve at Khan Yunus), one brigade of the 74th Division, the 54th Division, and the Imperial Camel Brigade were directly under the command of Lieut-General Dobell, who was in charge of the whole movement, and these troops were at call, to be used whenever and wherever required. The services of the 52nd Division were not used at all during the attack.

      The Desert Column, consisting of the 53rd Infantry Division, and the two mounted divisons, the Anzac and Imperial Mounted, all under the command of Lieut-General Chetwode, was given the task of surrounding and capturing Gaza. The 53rd Division under Major-General Dallas was to attack the position from the south, the Anzac Mounted Division under Major-General Chauvel was to slip past the town in the open country on the east and invest it on the north, while the Imperial Mounted Division under Major-General Hodgson and the Imperial Camel Brigade were to watch for any counterstroke of the enemy from the direction of Huj or Tel esh Sheria in the east, where large forces of the enemy were believed to be assembled.

      The infantry and mounted forces moved from their point of concentration near Deir el Belah, eight miles south-west of Gaza, shortly after midnight on March 26, and crossed the Wadi Ghuzzi in the early morning. Unfortunately about 4 a.m. a dense fog, unusual at this time of the year, rolled in from the sea and covered the Wadi and adjoining country. The 53rd Division moved slowly towards Esh Sheluf and Mansura, and halted as a reconnaissance could not be carried out till the fog lifted. Major-General Dallas had at first fixed his headquarters at El Breij, south of the Wadi, and at 9 a.m. he rode forward to Mansura, and summoned his brigadiers and the commander of his artillery to a conference, but it was 10.15 a.m. before they assembled. By the time a reconnaissance had been made, and formal orders regarding the plan of attack formed and issued to the various commanders, it was almost noon before the attack was begun.

      While Major-General Dallas had been moving his Headquarters from El Breij to Mansura, Headquarters of Desert Column had been out of touch with him for two hours, and as soon as communication was established Generals Dobell and Chetwode telegraphed him urgently to attack without delay.

      The infantry advanced along two ridges to attack the hill of Ali Muntar, a hill about three hundred feet high overlooking Gaza from the east, and celebrated as the spot to which Samson of old carried the gates of the city when the Philistines tried to trap him in the town. The approaches were covered by Turkish trenches, and broken by numerous impenetrable hedges of cactus and prickly pears which gave concealment to the Turks and proved impassable obstacles to the advance of the British, who suffered severely from rifle and machine-gun fire and from shelling by artillery. The 61st Brigade of the 54th Division was thrown into the line, and the British infantry pressed on all the afternoon till by 6.30 p.m. the whole position on Ali Muntar was captured, but at a heavy loss.

      In the meantime, in the early morning the two mounted divisions had taken advantage of the fog and had pressed on unobserved on the eastern side of Gaza. Soon after 9 a.m. the Anzac Division had arrived at its objective, Beit Durdis, five miles north-east of the city, and the 2nd A.L.H. Brigade soon extended its lines to the sea-coast north of the town. Squadrons were pushed out north and north-east to watch for the approach of any Turkish reinforcements, and one of these squadrons surprised and captured the Commander of the 53rd Turkish Division who was calmly proceeding into Gaza with a small escort to take over his new command. Although the mounted forces north of Gaza were under shell fire all forenoon, they did not meet with the determined opposition that the infantry did, and had not been very seriously engaged. About mid-afternoon the Anzac Division was ordered to press on an attack on the town so as to assist the infantry. This was done, and good progress was made in spite of the obstacles of cactus hedges and the resistance put up by the Turks in buildings in the outskirts of the town. When dusk fell the Second A.L.H. Brigade had reached the outskirts on the north and west, the Wellington Mounted Rifles (N.Z.) had captured two 77 m.m. Krupp guns and were in possession of a portion of the suburbs, while the Canterbury Mounted Rifles (N.Z.) had attacked Ali Muntar in the rear, and had joined up with the infantry of the 53rd Division in the eastern streets.

      The Imperial Mounted Division having followed the Anzac Division across the Wadi in the morning advanced to Kh.er Reseim, north-east of Gaza, and came into contact with small bodies of Turks. The Imperial Camel Brigade had left its camp at Abasan el Kebir, five miles south-east of Khan Yunus early in the morning, and moved directly to its crossing over the Wadi at Tel el Jemmi in spite of the pitch-black night. It then proceeded to El Mendur on the bank of the Wadi esh Sheria, and took up an outpost line from the right of the Imperial Mounted Division to the Wadi Ghuzzi. When the Anzac Division was thrown into the attack on Gaza in the afternoon, the Imperial Mounted Division was moved farther north, and the Imperial Camel Brigade was brought up to Kh.er Reseim to help to resist the pressure of the Turkish reinforcements, estimated at over three thousand, which were advancing towards the city from the east. With the assistance of the Third A.L.H. Brigade, light car patrols, and two light armoured motor batteries, the advance of the enemy was successfully checked by nightfall.

      The year was just past the equinox, sunset was at 6 p.m. By 6.30 p.m. dusk had fallen quickly, as it always does in that latitude, and by that time the 53rd Division had gained its objective, the dominating position of Ali Muntar, the Anzac Division had established a footing in the outskirts of the town on the north, north-east and north-west, the Turkish relief force from the north and east had been held up, the city had been completely surrounded except on a small section on the south-west, but General Dobell was not aware of the whole of the general situation till later on in the night, and as he felt that the relieving Turkish forces would menace the safety of the mounted divisions, he had decided that, unless Gaza was captured by nightfall, the troops must be withdrawn. General Chetwode agreed that it would be inadvisable for portions of the mounted forces to be fighting in the outskirts of Gaza while the remainder of the column was being attacked in force from the north and east. Shortly after 6 p.m. General Chetwode, with the approval of General Dobell, issued orders to Major-General Chauvel to withdraw the mounted forces and retire across the Wadi, and the infantry, at the same time, were ordered to retire from the positions they held. The Imperial Camel Brigade was placed under Chauvel’s command so that it might assist in covering the retirement, and soon after daylight next morning most of the mounted troops had retired to the south side of the Wadi Ghuzzi, but the Camel Brigade remained to assist in the retirement of the infantry next day.

      Later on in the night of the 26th, when General Dobell became aware of the success of the infantry, he instructed the 53rd Division under Dallas, to dig in on the position they had withdrawn to, and to link up with the 54th Division which also was moved back from the position it was holding. As a consequence the whole position gained on Ali Muntar was abandoned, but at daybreak it was discovered that the Turks had not retaken possession of it, so the British reoccupied it, but a counter-attack by the Turks drove them out of it by 9.30 a.m. The British troops suffered severely in retiring during the day, and when night came they recrossed the Wadi Ghuzzi.

      The total casualties on the British side amounted to 3,967, of whom 512 were posted as missing. The units that suffered most heavily were the 53rd Division and the 161st Brigade of the 54th Division. According to statements made later by the Turkish General Staff, the Turks’ total loss amounted to 2,447.

      On the night of the 26th when General Dobell decided to withdraw all the forces, the Imperial Camel Brigade hung on through the darkness, and next day had to fight severe rearguard actions. The G.O.C., Sir A. Murray, in his telegram of April 1 to the Chief of the Imperial General Staff in London, amongst other matters, stated that on the 27th, "The Turks attacked the 53rd and 54th Divisions and Camel Corps in entrenched positions. They were not in the least successful at any point, and again suffered the heaviest losses, e.g., Camel Corps nearly annihilated Turkish Cavalry Division. I estimate enemy losses 3,000 on this day. Cavalry and Camelry had to move back to El Balah to water, horses not having had any for twenty-four hours and camels for four days."

      General Murray’s messages hardly conveyed a correct impression of the true state of affairs. He stated: "The operation was most successful, and owing to the fog and waterless nature of the country round Gaza, just fell short of a complete disaster to the enemy." And again: "None of our troops were at any time harassed or hard pressed. It is proved conclusively that in the open the enemy have no chance of success against our troops, but they are very tenacious in prepared positions. In the open our mounted troops simply do what they like with them." Yet our forces had to withdraw from the attack on Gaza, having suffered fifty percent more casualties than the Turks.

      The Turks had a powerful wireless installation at Gaza, and another at Sheria where the bulk of the Turkish reserve forces were stationed, and as the day wore on, messages regarding the situation were exchanged between Major Tiller, the German officer in command of the garrison in Gaza, and Kress von Kres-senstein at Sheria. The British wireless station in Egypt picked up all these messages, and as the key of the Turkish cipher was in the possession of the British Intelligence Department, the messages were immediately deciphered, translated, and telephoned to Rafa, several of them before 6.30 p.m., but for some unexplained reason, their urgency was not recognized at the latter station, and they were not received by General Dobell till well on in the night, and after the retirement of the troops had been for some time in progress. Evidently Major Tiller considered the situation of the garrison as desperate; by evening he had reported that the British had entered the town by the north and east, the situation was very bad, and his troop commanders refused to face the combat at dawn. By midnight he stated that unless reinforcements were sent before daylight there was very little hope. The G.H.Q.s at Gaza and Sheria had actually exchanged farewell messages, and arrangements were made to destroy all papers, and blow up the Headquarters at the former place.

      The various units of the British army appear to have achieved individually the objectives assigned to them—the infantry had captured Ali Muntar, later than what was intended it is true; the mounted forces had very successfully cut off Gaza from the north and east; the Turkish reinforcements were held by dark; the air force had supplied correct information regarding the movements of enemy forces towards Gaza; the Intelligence Department had intercepted messages interchanged between the Military Governor of Gaza and the Commander of the reserve forces at Esh Sheria, showing that both had given up hope of the town being relieved; and yet Gaza remained in the hands of the Turks, with no prospect of a second surprise movement of a similar nature being successful on the part of the British. The only explanation for the failure seems to be that there was a lack of necessary communication between some of the various responsible officers in the field and at Rafa and those in charge of the whole operations at Headquarters. It has been freely stated by prominent members of the mounted forces that if the latter had been allowed to push their attack on the northern side much earlier the result would have been quite different.

    From NZHistory.govt.nz:
      The commander of Eastern Force (the Allied troops east of the Suez Canal), Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Dobell, thought that the Egyptian Expeditionary Force (EEF) could capture Gaza in March 1917 using tactics similar to those employed at Magdhaba and Rafah during the Sinai campaign, but on a much bigger scale.

      The cameleers and horsemen of Lieutenant-General Sir Philip Chetwode’s Desert Mounted Column, supported by a British infantry brigade, would sweep around behind the town, surrounding it and establishing an outer screen that would repel any attempts to relieve the garrison. The main assault would be undertaken by infantry of the 53rd (Welsh) Division and a brigade of the 54th (East Anglia) Division, supported by two field artillery brigades (36 18-pounder field guns) and an ad hoc battery of heavy artillery (six 60-pounders). The 52nd (Lowland) Division would remain in reserve at Khan Yunis.

      This was by far the largest force that had been mobilised by the EEF for a single operation. Though the Sinai railway had now reached El Arish, the number of men and animals required for the attack put a huge strain on the supply chain.

      The attackers could be supplied with food, water and ammunition for 24 hours at most. If they did not capture Gaza and its wells by nightfall they would have to withdraw to their starting point – or risk being counter-attacked by Ottoman reinforcements when they were tired, running low on ammunition and unable to make a quick getaway on dehydrated and faltering horses.

      The Ottoman garrison was thought to number around 2000 men, but was actually twice that size (at least half of them belonged to the 27th (Arab) Division). The garrison had seven artillery batteries, two of which were Austrian and one German, with 22 assorted field guns and mountain howitzers. Aerial reconnaissance by Turkish and German pilots had given its commanders ample warning of the impending attack. The better part of three Ottoman infantry divisions were ready to converge on Gaza and relieve the garrison.

      Early on the morning of 26 March 1917, the Desert Mounted Column set out to encircle Gaza under cover of darkness. The task of the Anzac Mounted Division was to seize the northern approaches, including the coastal road that linked the town to the rest of southern Palestine.

      The Imperial Mounted Division established a defensive line in the foothills to the north-east to block any approach by Ottoman forces from Huj, while the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade and the infantry brigade attached to the Desert Column blocked the road and railway line running south-east from Gaza to Beersheba. All this was accomplished by mid-morning, after only minor clashes with small groups of Ottoman troops.

      The main assault on Gaza did not go to plan. The first phase of the infantry attack, on the high ground of Ali Muntar, was delayed from 8 a.m. until midday by a combination of dense morning fog (not unusual on this desert coast), poor staff work and confusion amongst the divisional and brigade commanders. The British artillery bombardment was ineffective and the attacking infantry, advancing with little cover for much of the way, were met by a hail of artillery, machine-gun and rifle fire from the garrison. The 53rd (Welsh) Division suffered heavy losses and the assault quickly bogged down.

      At 1 p.m. General Chetwode ordered the Anzac Mounted Division, spearheaded by the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade, to attack Gaza from the north and north-east at 4 p.m.

      Meanwhile, the British infantry pressed on despite their heavy casualties and took almost complete possession of Ali Muntar. The Anzac troopers overwhelmed the thin Ottoman defences on the northern outskirts of Gaza and made good progress into the town. A squadron of the Canterbury Mounted Rifles reached Ali Muntar and joined in the final battle to clear it. By 6.30 p.m. soldiers of the 53rd Division were linking up with New Zealand and Australian troopers in the streets of Gaza, as the remnants of the Ottoman garrison prepared to make a final stand or fled for their lives in the failing light.

      Despite this apparent victory, General Dobell had already ordered a withdrawal. As far as he and Chetwode were concerned, they had run out of time. The chance to consolidate a victory was outweighed by the threat posed by an Ottoman counter-attack either that night or the next day on a force short of food, water and ammunition. Late in the afternoon the screening force had reported that large bodies of Ottoman troops were heading towards Gaza.

      Elements of three Ottoman infantry divisions were on the march, and the lead battalions clashed with patrols of the Imperial Mounted Division as dusk fell. The soldiers on the ground in Gaza did not know this. Feeling that their senior generals had just snatched defeat from the jaws of victory, the bewildered British, New Zealand and Australian troops withdrew from Gaza and Ali Muntar that evening and returned to Deir el Belah.

  Gaza II

    From a Steve Becker Forum post:
      Mates,

      Well what a few days, with heavy losses to all areas of this battle, exempt for the Ottomans who lost few men?

      What happened over five days in April can only be seen as the slaughter of so many for no gains.

      I wrote about this fighting by the Camel Bde which mentions some of the LH fighting.

      The Battle of 2nd Gaza

      By Steve Becker

      In the weeks following the first failed attempt to force the Gaza defences, (subsequent to General Sir Archibald Murray’s misleading report on the 1st Battle of Gaza) both antagonists initiated preparations to resume the struggle with increased intensity. This report which had convinced London that the enemy had suffered heavy casualties and that they should be attacked “as soon as possible” as a consequence his Army was substantially reinforced by all that could be spared from England as more troops, guns and supplies flowed into Egypt, these included tanks from the new Heavy Section of the Machine Gun Corps, which though worn by use as instructional tools in England, were a welcome addition, while other weapons sent were designed for terror, with 4000 gas shells for use against the stubborn enemy defences.

      Allied air force reports confirmed the expanding strength of the Turkish Army and the rapid building program as new defences spread rapidly across the desert from Gaza to Beersheba.

      The Camel Brigade during this time had been resting at Abassan el Kerbir where since March they had occupied and maintained an outpost line along the Wadi Ghuzze. This observation post was at Tell el Jemmi where a reinforced company from the Brigade was rotated each day while the remainder of the Brigade continued training, while also providing long range patrols out to the flanks of the Gaza position.  Much of this training involved the use of gas and the old PH type gas masks were issued to the troops which were forced to under go this instruction reluctantly.

      At this time the Brigade was composed of the following companies


      Camel Bde HQ   Gen Smith VC
      1st Battalion   LtCol Langley  Maj Mills (2ic)
      1st Co   Capt Cashman
      2nd Co   Capt Campbell
      3rd Co   Capt Naylor
      4th Co   Capt Denson

      2nd British Battalion   LtCol Gardner   Maj Winterton (2ic)
      5th Co   Capt Wilson
      6th Co   Capt Pettit
      7th Co   Capt Gregory
      9th Co   Capt Orchardson

      3rd Battalion   LtCol De Lancey-Forth     Maj Donovan (2ic)
      11th Co   Capt Creswell
      12th Co   Capt Norris
      14th Co   Capt Tolmer
      15th NZ Co   Capt Priest

      HK&S Batty   Maj Moore
      26th MG Sqn   Maj Millar
      1/1st Scottish Horse FAmb   Maj Mason

      While the Camel Brigade was in Palestine, the newly formed 4th Anzac Battalion continued training in Egypt and its companies helped to support the defences of the Southern Canal Section with the Battalion HQ and the 13th, 17th and 18th companies around Kantara while the 16th NZ company was assigned to the Northern Canal Section. Other companies of the Camel Corps were deployed all over Egypt with the 8th and 10th companies still with the Western Desert Force occupying Sollum.

      By early April General Murray’s Forces consisted of the Eastern Force under the command of General C. Dobell with four Infantry Divisions (52, 53, 54 and 74) and the Desert Column under General P. Chetwode of two Mounted Divisions (Anzac and Imperial) in all over 60,000 men and 182 guns.

      General Dobell was placed in overall command of the Army as General Murray was too remained in Egypt, still all operational planning had to be approved by him. The plan decided on allowed an offensive to take place in two phases, which because of the long distances needed to move the Army up to the defences of Gaza, that it would come as no surprise to the enemy.

      The 1st phase would to begin on the 17th April and would move the Army from its present position around Rafa across the Wadi Ghuzze and up to the defences of Gaza from the coast to south of the Sheikh Abbas ridge.  The 2nd phase would begin once the troops were concentrated and artillery in position, then an attack with the main strike Force with one Division (53) at Gaza and two Divisions (52 and 54) around El Muntar and Khirbet Sihan redoubts while one Division (74) was held in reserve. The Desert Column would protect the open right flank with the Anzac Mounted Division and while the infantry attacked frontally the Imperial Mounted Division would make a dismounted attack on the Atawine redoubt with the Camel Brigade attached. Each Infantry division was given two tanks and four were allocated to the 52nd Division for the battle and gas shells were supplied for the strong defences around El Muntar. The Navy would assist with a small fleet of warships by shelling Gaza from the sea and the Royal Flying Corps would have 25 aircraft of the 5th Wing (No’s 14 Sqn RFC and 67 Sqn AFC) to assist the Army.

      The Turkish Army were kept well informed of British preparations for the coming offensive and they continued to keep them under close observation with mounted patrols, spies and from the air where the Turks and Germans with only six planes of FA (Fliegerabteilung) 300, came over the British lines regularly bombing almost every day, paying particular attention to the horse lines.

      The 4th Turkish Army, under Colonel Ahmed Djamal Pasha, with the 22nd Corps under the German Kress Von Kressenstein, had rapidly increased in strength over the weeks and now consisted of three Infantry Divisions and one small Cavalry Division. These forces had strengthen the line from Gaza to Beersheba which employed the 3rd Division at Gaza, the 16th Division (less the 79th Regiment) at Tell et Sheria and the 53rd Division plus the 79th Regiment (16th Division) on the Khirbet Sihan line occupying a number of redoubts along the Gaza-Beersheba road. The 3rd Cavalry Division was held in reserve, and would later move down to Tel esh Sheria on the 17th April with the approach of the Desert Column. The total Turkish forces in all Palestine were around 48,000 and 101 guns of which only 18,000 were near the battle area at the time of the attack.

      The Camel Brigade received its orders early on the 16th April and made preparations to move at one hours notice. The 3rd company was at Jemmi with two sections of the 2nd company and a section of two guns of the Hong Kong and Singapore battery, when at dusk a strong body of Turkish cavalry was spotted approaching our position, they were kept under observation till dark when they retired to the north.

      On the 17th April the Army began to move and the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery with two sections of the 1st company were sent to the Wadi Ghuzze to protect the crossing and to act as an antiaircraft battery while the Brigade moved to Fukhari to anticipate a move while remaining under cover from enemy aircraft. The brigade waited undisturbed without any word till around 5 pm on the 18th April when it was ordered to cross the Wadi Ghuzze and concentrated by midnight at Charring Cross. The Battalions started out at 6 pm and after crossing the Wadi Ghuzze, where they concentrated at Charring Cross between 10 pm and midnight, there the troops dismounted and waited for the word to move forward as they rested and prepared for the day.

      During the short break at Charring Cross orders arrived for General C.L Smith VC which informed him that the Brigade had been placed under the command of General S. Hare of the 54th Division, this order No 43 of Eastern Force establish the Camel Brigade in the front line for the attack on the Khirbet Sihan group of trenches, which where 4000 yards south-east of Ali Muntar. The attack called for an assault by the Camel Brigade with the 163rd Brigade at key redoubts on the Gaza-Beersheba road and two tanks of “E” Company Heavy section of the Machine Gun Corps were allocated to the 54th Division for there capture. Of these tanks one had been destroyed on the 17th April and now only one remained to carry out the plan.

      At 4.45 am on the 19th April the men moved dismounted into their assembly areas with the 1st Battalion leading passed Dumbell Hill then on to Sheikh Abbas ridge were the 1/8th Hampshire (Hants) Battalion had entrenched and we began preparations for the assault. The animals had been withdrawn with their holders under the command of the battalion 2ic’s to behind the Sharta ridge at 3.30 am and only those camels needed to carry stores, ammunition or cacotets moved with the troops up to the assembly area. While there a British officer of the Machine gun Corps reported to General Smith to discuss the operation and the use of his tank, he attracted much attention as a curio before being given the objective then driving off to his position. General Hare had attached the 1/7th Essex Battalion of the 161st Brigade (which was held in reserve), to the Camel Brigade for the coming battle only it was slow in arriving and did not take part in the action till later in the day.

      General Smith deployed his brigade with its 1st Battalion on the left to support the 163rd Brigade in its seizure of the key redoubt at Tel Seichan (later known as Tank redoubt) and the 3rd Battalion to the right to assault the Khirbet Sihan village near the redoubts (known as Jack and Jill redoubts) the 2nd Battalion was held in support and reserve until the 1/7th Essex should arrive when the Essex Battalion would be used as the reserve. The Brigade would be supported on the right by the 4th Light Horse Brigade (less one regiment) of the Imperial Mounted Division during its attack on the Atawine redoubt

      Garrisoning this line was the Turkish 53rd Division, a good quality Anatolian Division under the veteran command of Colonel Selahattin Bey, with the 163rd Regiment on the right in the area of El Muntar, and the 165th Regiment holding the area of the Khirbet Sihan redoubts, including the Tank, Jack and Jill and Atawine Redoubts, while the 161st Regiment was in reserve near Hirbet - Ruseym, ready to move to any threaten area. The 125th Regiment (16th Division) under Major Hayri Bey, was also held in reserve at Berti Cered, until the morning of the 18th/19th April when it was moved down to the area of Hirbetel-Kufiye. The 14th Artillery Regiment had all its batteries deployed along the front with two groups east of the Tank Redoubt and one west. Three companies of Engineers were also attached to the Division, as was the Austro Hungarian 2/6th “Obus” 6x 100mm Gun Gerbirgshaubitz (Mountain) Battery under Lieutenant Lewicki, along with a team of AAA guns (Two 37mm Maschinen Flugabwehr Kanonen auf Sockel) from the Bavarian Flakzug 136, under Lieutenant de Reserve Bader.

      The ground over which the 1st Battalion had to attack sloped down from point 404 on Sheikh Abbas ridge then gradually up to the enemies redoubt on the 400 metre plateau a distance of just over 2000 yards, the terrain was completely exposed with little cover except for a number of small wadis which had cut the bare ground like a knife wound from the infrequent rains. The redoubt was on a flat rise which gave excellent observation over the surrounding area, it had been turned into a fortress with an outer and inner defence lines surrounded by barb wire and to its rear ran the Gaza-Beersheba road. It was strongly garrisoned by a Battalion plus a section of the Machine Gun Company of the 165th Turkish Infantry Regiment with about 400 men in the Redoubt and around 200 men in the surrounding area for counterattack, while two 4 gun batteries of 14th Turkish Artillery Regiment directly supported them.

      The 1st Anzac Camel Battalion’s attack

      The main attack by the Camel Brigade would be made by the 1st Battalion under Lieutenant Colonel George Langley, who deployed the 2nd Company under Captain Archie Campbell on the left with the 4th Company under Captain Herbert Denson on the right, the 3rd Company under Captain Fred Naylor in support, while Captain Walter Cashman’s 1st Company (less two sections guarding the field ambulance and Hong Kong and Singapore Battery) were held in reserve, in all the Battalion numbered not more then 360 men in the firing line.

      The battle plan called for the 1st Battalion to “Move on to the ridge on the right of the 163rd Brigade, the left battalion in the Camel Brigade will advance and conform to the movement of that Brigade.” which meant the 1st battalion would advance with the 163rd Brigade, which had placed its jump off tapes about 200 yards in front of the 2nd Company, their right flank Battalion was the 1/5th Norfolk, which would act as the guide for our advance as Divisional orders called for the Camel companies to bypass the main redoubt, as it would be secured by the British infantry, while the Camel companies would push on to secure the defences to the rear of the redoubt.

      On Thursday the 19th April, the cold morning air was broken by the sound of heavy guns with Zero hour at 5.30 am, this preparation bombardment was to last for two hours as they pounded the redoubts along the main Turkish line, assisted by the navy and concentrating there fire on Gaza and the strong defences of Ali Muntar. At 7.20 am the Divisional 18 pdr Batteries took over laying down fire on the main points to be attacked, the display was quite impressive except was later found that most of the shells had missed there intendant targets.

      At Zero hour plus two (7.30 am), the word was given to advance and the tank allocated to the attack moved from behind Dumbell Hill into a position in between the 1/5th Norfolk’s and the 1st Battalion. This tank was a MK1 female called HMLS Nutty, under command of 2/Lieutenant Frank Carr and his crew of seven men, it moved off to the rear of and between the 1st Battalion and 1/5th Norfolk’s still due to a small wadi it was forced to the right, crossing behind the 1st Battalion in front of Sheikh Abbas ridge, as it then moved towards the objective to the north-west back across the front of the 1st Battalion as it advanced to catch up with the 1/5th Norfolk’s.

      The 2nd Company had moved off promptly at 7.30 to cover the 2000 yards they would need to traverse before reaching the enemy trenches, only first they had to align themselves with the 1/5th Norfolk, still carrying the weight of 300 rounds of ammunition (Camel brigade SOP) and stores of a pick and shovel per three men and over the soft sand quickly exhausted the men (this was exceeding the load authorized in Divisional orders by General Hare of 150 rounds per man or the 250 rounds in the Imperial Mounted Division orders). The infantry with a shorter distance to travel kept up a strong pace forcing the cameleers to continue moving and not to advance by section rushes. The leading companies were deployed on a section front with three extended lines in each section, Lewis guns were placed to the right of the second line as the companies moved from artillery formation into extended order after moving a few hundred yards.

      The enemy had quickly spotted the advance of our troops and the Tank and laid a sporadic fire along the line of advancing men, a number were hit still the men pushed on under the steady fire of shell and machine gun. About 8 am the 1st Battalion was rejoined by HMLS Nutty which had moved across their front from the right and soon attracted the attention of a number of enemy Batteries which began to pound the area around the tank and the companies of the 1st Battalion and 5th Norfolk’s, this fire was both heavy and extremely accurate and it appeared to the men to be singling out individuals, the enemy had plenty of time to range the ground and its shooting showed its expertise, and it was said by the soldiers of the Camel Brigade, “to be the finest bit of shooting they had ever seen” with the enemy never wasting a shell, moreover it was under this now continuous fire that the 2nd company were forced to shift to their left as they followed in the wake of the tank.

      The men had closed in behind the tank for protection from the fusillade except it only served as a focal point to the enemy gunners, as they struggled under the weight of there loads and the enemies salvos, the infantry was still in front of the cameleers and fell in behind the tank as it passed them while the 2nd company had to kept on the move till a small sand ridge was gained about 8.15 am.

      This small ridge was between 350 to 500 yards from the enemy redoubt and there the shattered and exhausted remnants of the two Battalions took shelter as the tank was hit and lost direction in a small wadi between the ridge and the redoubt. Meanwhile Captain Campbell sent orders back to the 3rd Company, to conform to him, as the 4th company had disappeared to his right in the smoke and dust and his own company was severely hit. Meanwhile Captain Birbeck OC A Company 5th Norfolk’s gathered his survivers around him as the remainder of his battalion took cover.

      The 163rd Brigade, at this time committed the two companies (A and B) of the 1/8th Hants Battalion, which had been in support, to assist with the 5th Norfolk’s, while the other two companies (C and D) were supporting the 4th Norfolk’s, only A and B companies were decimated in moving forward trying to reach the 5th Norfolk’s and barely a few gallant men of the right flanking companies struggled through the fire to reinforce the beleaguer force, these joined the remainder of the Norfolk’s and Camel companies around 08.30 am.

      Meanwhile the advance by the 4th company and Battalion Headquarters had been drawn to the east to adhere to orders to bypass the redoubt and conform with the 11th company only the heavy cross fire had forced them to seek cover in a small wadi which ran to west off of the main Wadi Sihan just as the 2nd company had been drawn west towards the 163rd Brigade, a gap was now created between his forward companies and Lieutenant Colonel Langley was forced to committed his small reserve of two sections of the 1st Company, under Captain Cashman, to fill this gap. In the meanwhile the 3rd company had struggled forward to support Captain Campbell and under heavy shell fire had followed the line of bodies belonging to the 2nd company. They reached the small sand ridge shortly after 8.30 am which was occupied by the sheltering 2nd Company and the remains of the 5th Norfolk’s and 8th Hants and soon became embroiled in the fight with the Turkish defences, in which both companies were heavily hit by the enemies fire and suffered many casualties with Captain Naylor wounded, yet continued to lead.

      Around 8.40 am the tank HMLS Nutty appeared again under a cloud of dust and exploding shells driving straight for the redoubt, seeing this Captain Campbell decided that he could no longer follow his orders and bypass the redoubt, however now must make a dash and secure the fortification.

      He lined a number of Lewis gunners along the top of the small ridge and using there fire ordered the men to advance, both the 2nd and 3rd companies fixed bayonets and rose to the attack. These companies had started the day with a little over one hundred men in both, now barely half that number had survived, and as the Turkish fire hit these heroes that number was again sadly reduced, still they surged on and made the Turkish line under a volley of rifle fire and with the help of soldiers from the 5th Norfolk and 8th Hants, set about clearing the trenches “with the bayonet”. The wounded Captain Naylor had insisted in leading his men forward, only to be shot in the head on reaching the enemies trenches, in a life or death struggle to capture it, the death of Captain Naylor, who had never been well esteemed by his men after an incident at Sollum in 1916, only after this day that view changed.

      The Turks which occupied this part of the redoubt put up a stout defence, only the shock of the tank, and the aggressive attitude of our troops, proved to much for them, as they broke and ran back to their rear defences, some throwing away their weapons still between 20 and 50 Turks were captured, 20 prisoners by Sergeant Joseph Pearson B Company 8th Hants, these prisoners were promptly gathered and sent to the rear under guard of several wounded men from the British and Camel companies except few survived the bullet swept ground of no man’s land.

      Meanwhile the redoubt at this time was a scene of chaos, as the tank was under close fire by two four gun batteries, this intensity continued as the tank belching fire and smoke had entered the redoubt dealing with enemy machine guns, except bellied in the first trench where it was then seen to be hit by three HE shells, which broke its track and bust into flames, forcing its abandonment by the brave crew, and so it was left as a target for the enemy gunners, however thanks to the tank the damage had been done and our small forces had secured a vital tenure in the redoubt by 9 am.

      Captain Campbell now took control of the survivors and with only about thirty men remaining of the two Camel companies he placed the remnants of the 2nd company in the centre and the stronger 3rd company on the right flank, still most of the men were mixed together and fought with who ever took command. On one flank Sergeant Charlie Greenway, who had taken command of his section after the officer was wounded, continued to fire on the panicked Turks as they raced to the rear.

      Meanwhile on the left flank the remainder of the British Battalions, in all about twenty or more men, under Captain Blyth B Company 5th Norfolk’s, occupied and extended their hold in the trench and formed a defence, following the death of Lieutenant Colonel Bernard Grissell DSO. These measures were necessary as there were not enough men to control the whole redoubt, so it had to be held by a number of strong points. In the centre Campbell placed six Lewis guns along the exposed top of the trench to keep any Turkish counterattack to the flanks. The enemy had now retired to their secondary defences, which were still on a higher elevation to our men and there poured a strong fire into our positions.

      During the morning the endurance of Captain Campbell and his men was tested under the increasing pressure of the enemy, six runners were dispatched back to Lieutenant Colonel Langley all requesting reinforcement and ammunition, still none arrived in time, all disappeared in the exposed ground between the redoubt and our lines. One man Private Edward Richardson, carried a message out and after going 50 yards was shot three times and despite these serious wounds crawled back with his message arriving to late, and Corporal Bill Hope the Battalion Signal Corporal, was killed carrying such a massage. While Private Bert Galli had tried to get through with three camels loaded with small arms ammunition, except the animals were killed by heavy fire, Galli tried again during the day but was forced to stop, still never the less did succeed in bringing some much needed ammunition to the 4th Company.

      The breach of this redoubt caused considerable concern in the enemies’ camp and the Divisional reserves of the Battalions of the 161st Regiment were rushed to this threatened sector, meanwhile the reserve company of the 165th Regiment was committed to the Tank redoubt from the area of Khirbet Sihan and began to infiltrate towards our troops in the redoubt.

      Around 10 am, groups of the enemy were observed gathering to the flanks, and they began to move slowly forward, in one case they appeared being driven by a German officer, who recklessly exposed himself to our fire, yet bore a charmed life without being hit. These new troops now found the redoubt was not held in any strength, and small parties of the enemy soon established pockets amongst our posts, which soon became untenable with the strong cross fire and with the shortage of ammunition, we were forced to retire further along the trench onto the rear posts, thus our men retired fighting step by step to the rearmost trenches where they had broken in hours before. Among the heroes of this contest was Sergeant Wally Finley, of the 2nd company, who was killed resisting the enemy allowing our men to escape and form a new bomb block, and Sergeant Albert Cook, Privates Soles Nassau and Richard Biggs of the 3rd company who fought until overrun and were never seen again?

      The Cameleers were now using a lot of Turkish ammunition and bombs, as our own ammunition was exhausted, never the less, with this increasing pressure they could not hold out for much longer.

      Shortly after 11 pm, as Captain Campbell sorted out the last of the Camel company survivors in the remaining section of trench, the Lewis gunners were still in action and broke up a number of enemy concentrations as the Turks prepared to drive the last of our men out of the redoubt, Lieutenant Bill Ellis was sent to the left, as some soldiers were seen retiring, only he was wounded, and as the ammunition now gave out, and with no hope of reinforcements or ammunition to continue the battle, Captain Campbell had no option but to order the survivors to withdraw, the word was quickly passed to Captain Blyth, who at first wanted to fight it out to the finish, except faced with the inedible they agreed to retire. Before he left Captain Campbell went to check on his Lewis gun teams, to ask for volunteers to cover the withdrawal, only to find one wounded survivor, Private William Barry, who was ordered to retire and despite a broken arm carried his Lewis gun out.

      There was much confusion in the trenches at this time, as not all the men received the word to go, while others found themselves cut off by the Turks, who appeared all over, while others seeing the retreat ordered the men to stay and fight and cover the retirement. A similar scene occurred with the British, as those who couldn’t make the trip back were left to be captured.

      Captain Campbell had set off with Lieutenant Ernest Aylwin and CQMS Harry Malcolm (who should have remained in the rear but had joined the attack for the fun of it) they became separated in the smoke and rifle fire, and only Campbell made it back without a scratch, the sole officer of nine from the two Australian Camel companies, who took part in the assault to do so. The survivors had retreated out of the redoubt to the right rear in the direction of the 4th company, as the ground to the rear was strongly covered by the enemy’s fire. Meanwhile the 1st company had moved into a conspicuous position between the redoubt and the 4th company to provide the link, except they were soon forced to cover the retirement of the 2nd and 3rd companies from the protection of a small wadi, still with only two small sections, Captain Cashman was limited in what he could do, and he held his ground as a counterattack was expected from the enemy, while in this position the company lost, Private John Mitchell killed, and two officers (Bill Ellis and Les Stock), and a number of men wounded. He did establish contact after 1 pm with the remainder of the British Battalion’s, who had dug in around the small sand ridge.

      During the long afternoon the wounded lay exposed to the sun, lying in agony waiting for someone to get them, except with nearly all of their mates now dead or wounded most waited in vain. Despite this a large number of our wounded were brought in by men such as Sergeant Bob Love of the 4th company, who went out into no man’s land to help recover the many victims, yet they where to numerous for all to be recovered and some had to be left to the clemency of the enemy. Lieutenant Colonel Langley had set up a casualty dressing station to the rear of his HQ, in a small wadi, and all the wounded who could be reached were brought there for dressing before moving them to the rear. One of those brought in wounded was Lance Sergeant James Anderson, an original from the 8th Battalion AIF, who was suffering from a gun shot wound to the buttocks, while others were not so lucky, Private Sid Cherry a Canadian, who had enlisted in the 3rd Battalion AIF in 1915 before transferring to the Camel Corps, and Private Wilhelm Konsten, one of a number of Finnish born seaman, were both killed.

      As the action continued in the redoubt, the 4th company had become pinned down behind a small sand ridge about 400 yards to the east of the redoubt, and Captain Denson was ordered to dig in by Lieutenant Colonel Langley and await developments and to minimize casualties. This had happened because true to their orders the company had continued to advance for the rear defences of the enemy redoubt, and despite the Turkish fire, they soon found that the company was isolated in between the tank redoubt and the Wadi Sihan, with no support available other then the 11th company on its right flank. The men were forced to hide behind a small Wadi and engage the enemy, also to cover the withdrawal of the 2nd and 3rd companies, still the enemy had them in a deadly cross fire from the redoubt and the Wadi Sihan and sustained many casualties in this exposed position, these included Sergeant Herbert Perkins, Privates Arthur Emery, Neil Munro, John White and Richard Winslett were killed and three officers and 27 men wounded.

      When Captain Campbell and his men had retired from the tank redoubt, there still remained a small garrison, who were left to fight it out alone, only with little ammunition remaining it was only a matter of time before they were overrun. This isolated party numbering over thirty men of all nationalities, continued to challenge the enemy till around 2 pm, when the Turks broke into the last section of trench. There the wounded Lieutenant Bill Fender of the 2nd company found himself in a trench with a number of men and after being hit in the neck was abandoned as dead and captured, along with a collection of men, most of whom were wounded, about 11 Australians and eight British soldiers were captured when Lieutenant Wilfred Strachan-Roberts of the 8th Hants, tried to fight it out in the last trench, only were compelled to surrender. Two men Privates Roy Kelly and Bert Story from the 3rd company escaped the Turks during capture, and set off with bullets chasing them as they ran back to our lines, Kelly was wounded and Story had five bullets through his hat, still both survived to tell the tail.

      During this time Major John Marsh OC 8th Hants, gathered approximately one hundred and forty survivors around him to form a line in the sand outside the redoubt. Among this group was Lieutenant Wharton 1/4th Norfolk’s, along with Lieutenant Buxton from the 163rd Bde HQ. They remained in this exposed position bringing in the many wounded including Corporal Burtenshaw and Private Toogood, and waited for any expected Turkish counterattack, until the 5th Suffolk’s arrived.

      At 1 pm General Hare had ordered the 161st Brigade forward to reinforce the line held by the 163rd Brigade, which had suffered over 1500 casualties, including two Battalion and twelve Company commanders, when they arrived, the 1/5th Suffolk (163rd Bde) and the 1/6th Essex Battalions (161st Bde) were ordered to make a fresh attack on the redoubt. At 2.20 pm the Battalions commenced their advance, still had not gone far when the attack was stopped by General Hare, this was due to the withdrawal from the redoubt by the last of our forces, and declining situation on his right flank with the retirement of the 4th Light Horse Brigade, and the problems with the Imperial Mounted Division.

      At 5.55 pm orders were received that “the battalion was to withdraw back to the ridge” and Lieutenant Colonel Langley arranged for the clearing station to be removed before moving the 1st and 4th companies. At 7.45 after having gathering all the wounded that could be recovered the remnants of the battalion quietly moved back to Sheikh Abbas ridge in the safety of darkness undisturbed by the enemy, and found the 7th Essex Battalion in position to cover their retirement, the 1st Battalion then moved to the rear of the ridge to take up a reserve position.

      During the night the number of Australian prisoners would increased as the enemy cleared the ground between the lines and in all twenty two Australian cameleers from the 2nd and 3rd companies were captured by the Turks, and an unknown number of British soldiers, which included the crew of the intrepid tank HMLS Nutty, 2/Lieutenant Frank Carr age 35, a Golfing International from Birmingham UK, the daring tank commander had been badly burned during his escape from the blazing tank and died from his wounds in a Turkish hospital, Lieutenant Bill Fender the only Australian Camel Corps officer to be captured during the war, had transferred to the Cameleers from the 6th Light Horse Regiment in 1916 and was 29 years old from Ashfield in Sydney NSW, only he died of wounds in the hands of the enemy that night before medical help could reach him, this unfortunate fact was not know by the family of both Carr and Fender, until two years later when the prisoners were released, as they had been reported as a prisoner after the battle by the Turks, and the family endeavoured to discover his whereabouts, only they heard no word of him until 1919.

      Among the many Australian prisoners were Private Harold Vidler, one of the last Lewis gunners, who with Private Phil Fletcher, had fought to the last round when the order to retire was given, they had set off after Captain Campbell, but after going a few yards Vidler was shot threw the knee and Fletcher disappeared in the smoke also wounded, Vidler lay wounded in front of the redoubt till morning when a number of Turkish looters discovered him, they killed another man near him with a bayonet, only spared him and was found later by a enemy patrol. Private Charles Flatt, was wounded outside the redoubt in the charge, he had been shot in three places in the leg and thigh and was found by a Turkish patrol during the night. Private Walter Humphris had also been seriously wounded in the charge and was later recovered that night by the Turks, he lasted a few days before dying from his wounds in a Turkish hospital. Among the 11 Cameleers captured with Lieutenant Roberts of the Hampshire Regiment were Private Reuben Blechynden (wounded), Corporal Alex Currie, Privates Joe Dodd, Phil Fooks, Tom Halliday, Daniel Jones (wounded), Ernest Ingram (wounded), Phil O’Hare, Charles Otway (wounded), Lance Corporal Arthur Tierney and Private John Angus. Other wounded taken prisoner included Sergeant George Paltridge, Privates Fred Jeffrey, William Simmons and Noel Sherrie, while others were trapped in the redoubt and surrendered for lack of ammunition Privates Pat Duffy, Albert Kimber and Sergeant Fred Saville.

      The 3rd Anzac Battalion’s attack

      While the 1st Battalion was advancing on Tank redoubt, the 3rd Anzac Battalion, under Lieutenant Colonel Newell De Lancey-Forth, was to attack and occupy the Khirbet Sihan village, near the redoubts (known as Jack and Jill redoubts) and, to prevent the movement of enemy troops across his front from Beersheba or from Huj to Gaza. He organize the battalion with the 11th Company under Captain Randolph Creswell on the left and the 12th company under Captain Arthur Norris to the right, the 14th company under Captain James Tolmer in support and the 15th NZ company under Captain Roy Priest was held in reserve, a section of the Brigade machine gun squadron with their heavy Vickers Machine guns were placed under command to engage targets at distance once the position was taken, in all the 3rd Battalion numbered around 450 all ranks.

      The terrain on which the battle was fought consisted of the Khirbet Sihan redoubts which lay behind the Gaza-Beersheba road and to the right of the Wadi Khirbet Sihan on two small hills at a height of 400 meters, behind these hills was the small Arab village of Khirbet Sihan which housed the garrison Headquarters of the 165th Turkish Infantry Regiment of the 53rd Turkish Division. The defences of Jack and Jill hills were two small redoubts with defences stretching west into the Wadi Sihan and east to overlook the next redoubt on Atawine ridge. The terrain was open but for the main Wadi and a number of washouts which all flowed into the Wadi Sihan, a number of barley fields cut this other wise barren land scape run in peace time by the villagers from Khirbet Sihan, the strength of the garrison was unknown but should have numbered not more then 200 men of a reinforced Company from a unknown Battalion of the 165th Turkish Infantry Regiment.

      The 3rd Anzac Battalion formed up at 7 am to the east of the Sheikh Abbas ridge, and the advance began promptly at 7.30 am, as the troops began to move towards the Gaza-Beersheba road the tank HMLS Nutty came into view as it passed behind the rear and right of the 1st Battalion trying to cross a small wadi, the Turks quickly saw this movement and showered both battalions with shell fire as the tank then started towards the front of the 1st Battalion and shortly disappeared in a cloud of dust belching exhaust smoke. About this time the Hong Kong and Singapore battery which had deployed to the rear of the 3rd Battalion was hit by a lucky shell that fell amongst the camels killing or wounding the crew to one of the guns including Gunner Vincent Sykes who was mortally wounded and scattering the remainder of the battery animals which put the battery out of action for some time.

      Chook Fowler 12th Light Horse Regiment, mentions this incident in his book “Looking Backwards”, “That the Turks directed some of there 70mm (75mm) guns on to them, I saw two direct hits on the camels, and many pieces of camel and parts of the guns went high into the air”. “We never heard any shells that had been fired by that battery”.

      Meanwhile the men advanced quickly across the open ground towards their objective, the companies had deployed on section fronts in three lines with Lewis guns interlaced amongst the sections and moved in extended line formation under sporadic shell and rifle fire losing a number of men as they advanced, these included Private Ray Webb who was mortally wounded when hit on the head by a shrapnel Pellet, while amongst the wounded at this time were Captain Norris, who was shot through the foot, along with Privates Jack Condon and Edward Wright.

      The 11th company was now being drawn towards the 1st Battalion and the stalled 4th company on the left, as the 12th company pushed on through a field of barley only the fire from the first redoubt became too heavy and soon forced the company to seek cover in the Wadi Sihan, which was short of the Gaza-Beersheba road. Lieutenant Colonel Forth soon arrived with Battalion Headquarters and walked among the sheltering men inspiring them with his recklessness while others complained of him drawing the enemies’ fire. Here they exchanged fire with the Turks for some time while remaining pinned to the wadi walls till around 8.45 am when Lieutenant Colonel Forth ordered the men up and attack as he had perceived the 1st Battalion rush their objective.

      The men came out of the wadi at the run with bayonets fixed as they quickly crossed the Gaza-Beersheba road under an intense crossfire from machine gun and rifle, flushing out a number of Turks in spider holes in advance of the main position, despite this fire the cameleers gained the first Turkish redoubt which to their surprise was abandoned without the enemy offering any resistance and a number of prisoners were taken, some wounded except most escaped to the second redoubt.

      While the 12th company was advancing across Gaza-Beersheba road C Squadron of the 11th Light Horse Regiment, who was on the battalions far right flank, observed two machine guns nests in enfilade of them, Major Percy Bailey quickly ordered two troops under Lieutenant’s George Hoffman and Charles Clifford to rushed forward and capture these guns, except soon joined the 12th company in the capture of the last redoubt.

      With this unexpected bonus in the capture of this first entrenchment now allowed Lieutenant John (Jock) Davidson, who had taken command after Captain Norris had been wounded, to push forward his company then rush the next redoubt? At this time the two troops from C Squadron supported the attack on the right flank while this mixed force of light horsemen and cameleers advanced on the last redoubt under a tormenting fire. Fortunately the enemy in the 2nd redoubt were still too stunned and disorganized to put up only a token resistance as they once more broke and ran to the rear towards Khirbet Sihan village as our men reached the Turkish works overrunning the frightened garrison.

      One of the men to win the DCM that day was Private John McGrath of the 11th Light Horse, who rescued the crew of a Hotchkiss machine gun after they had been wounded, he would later join his brother in the 12th Company during in the war.

      This victory now left us in command of an important position among the enemies’ defences and Lieutenant Davidson now had to reorganize his company while his Lewis guns teams fired at the retreating Turks and also took one of the enemies’ batteries under fire as it raced to get out of range.

      It was said by higher command at the time that our men never reached this far except later in the war members of the Brigade and Battalion revisited the area and found the remains of men from the 3rd Battalion still around this position and this marked the extreme point reached by allied troops that day.

      Meanwhile the Enemy had become alarmed at the loss of so vital a position and with its important location to Khirbet Sihan, still a concentrated response could not be quickly arranged as the local reserve had been used at the Tank redoubt and Jack and Jill redoubts would have to wait until the Divisional reserves arrived.

      Shell fire increased as the men arranged their defences against an expected counterattack. It was during this fire that word came from the Headquarters of the 11th Light horse to withdraw the two Troops of C Squadron from the redoubts. Lieutenant Colonel Forth sent Lieutenant Davidson to Major Bailey to ask them to stay except with reluctance the two troops under Lieutenant’s Hoffman and Clifford had to depart leaving the reduced and battered 12th company to hold both redoubts alone. The 11th company at this time was still near the Wadi Sihan on the Gaza-Beersheba road holding off enemy flank attacks still the situation in front of the 4th Light Horse Brigade and the Imperial Mounted Division in its attack on the Atawine redoubt had turned against them as large bodies of the enemy were counterattacking their line and so C Squadron was desperately needed to assist and they retired some distance to the rear of the 3rd Camel Battalion to rejoin their parent formation.

      At 2.30 pm large numbers of Turkish reinforcements had now arrived, this led to the 4th Light Horse Brigade being ordered to retire to a ridge 700 yards to their rear having already retired some 600 yards from the Atawine defences exposing the flank of the Camel Brigade.

      This disclosed the position held by the 12th company which now became untenable as this vital position was not reinforced, and with the men now falling and the Lewis gun teams being knocked out one by one, till only five men remained, among those killed were Sergeant Lindsay Field an original from the 3rd Light Horse Regiment, Privates Ernie Norton shot in the chest and Alex Gibson his mate killed near him. Among the many wounded were Privates Arthur Gwyther shot in the abdomen, Vince Hennessy hit in the leg, Bill McManus hit in the arm, Alf Kennett hit in the mouth and Levy Tompkins hit in the head.

      As the long afternoon dragged on, Turkish troops of the 161st Regiment, where seen advancing in a crescent formation trying to encircle the company on Jack and Jill Redoubts, when Lieutenant Davidson received orders to retire to the 11th company’s position near the Gaza-Beersheba road. This was accomplished with little trouble in spite of the large number of wounded with the company, as they retired down the hills, fire came from three sides as they fought there way back to the wadi and some form of safety.

      All the while the 11th Company was still holding the area around the Wadi Sihan under the most trying of circumstances and increasing pressure from the enemy, who was using the wadi to cut off our men on Jack and Jill hills, in the desperate fighting along the wadi Cpl Mick Mahoney and Private Mick Hogan (shot in the throat) along with Private Ken Mudge were killed and there were many wounded.

      Around 3 pm General Hare had become aware of the trouble on his right flank and had ordered his Division and the Camel Brigade to hold fast and prepare for a counterattack that should the Imperial Mounted Division uncover this right flank, he would be ready to move troops to the threatened area and have the Camel Brigade in a defensive position to repel any attack. This change of fortune and his failure to break the enemy defences had convinced General Hare to stop the wasting attacks against the enemies’ strong fortifications and had stopped the attack by the 161st Brigade and ordered the withdrawal of the 3rd Battalion from its exposed position on Jack and Jill redoubts.

      The 3rd Battalion Headquarters had remained in the wadi and now with both companies concentrated Lieutenant Colonel Forth encouraged the men to hold on except he was wounded, when shot in the shoulder, along with the Regimental Sergeant Major George Hay, who was evacuated, only to died from his wounds during the night, he was 45 years old and a veteran of Gallipoli, an original from the 18th Battalion AIF, he had been senior soldier in the 3rd Battalion since its formation in December.

      By the late afternoon Lieutenant Colonel Forth discovered the 4th Light Horse Brigade was retiring again, and with the destruction of the 1st Battalion, now found himself alone in front of an aggressive enemy, when the order by General Hare arrived to withdrawal to a defensive position on the Sheikh Abbas ridge. Lieutenant Colonel Forth then ordered all wounded gathered and commanded the evacuation back through the barley field to the edge of the Sheikh Abbas ridge where the 14th company occupied a defensive position with the section of the Brigade Machine gun squadron to the east of Pt 404. The rear guard fought during the evacuation as the Turks pressed our troops, however they continued to be the targets for Turkish artillery as they moved up Sheikh Abbas ridge, Lance/Corporal James Kermode commanded a Lewis gun team with the 14th company and covered this retirement and when the two companies passed him he was subjected to the enemies shells and rifle fire, except he held on to till the men were safe then retired fighting. The soldiers of the 11th and 12th companies had been at first reluctant to abandon the ground won at such a cost and on arrival back to the 14th companies position were exhausted by their experience.

      On the arrival the 12th company on Sheikh Abbas ridge they were moved into reserve and the 15th NZ Company moved up to extended the firing line to the south-east, thus refusing the line. The 14th company thicken the line with elements of the brigade machine gun squadron and waited for the expected counterattack. The 4th Light Horse Brigade had by this time retired well to the rear of Sheikh Abbas ridge and support from that flank had almost disappeared.

      The Turks continued shell the cameleer’s line, and during this shelling Lieutenant Ben Chapman was killed observing for his battery of the Hong Kong and Singapore artillery.

      There on Sheikh Abbas ridge the Camel Brigade waited however the enemy held back which allowed our troops to rest and reorganize and to clear some of the many wounded from the battlefield. The commanders of both Battalions requested artillery support late in the afternoon to break up enemy concentrations only none was available to the Camel Brigade. The troops were treated late in the day to a display of aerial combat as a German Turbe (Rumbler C1) of FA (Fliegerabteilung) 300 flown by Fizefeldwebel Gustave Kautzmann and a British Martinsyde of No 14 Squadron RFC fought it out in the sky above them, they all cheered as one of the planes fell to the earth only to discover that it was ours and the pilot Captain Francis Bevan had been killed.

      Once it became dark at 7.45 pm the 3rd Battalion was ordered to retired further up the ridge and dig in with the 7th Essex around Pt 404. Turkish snipers became active in the dark and a number of men were hit including Captain Priest, commanding the 15th NZ Company, who was mortally wounded while visiting his posts. The 2nd Battalion replaced the 1st Battalion in the defences and soon their line was tested when the 5th and 9th companies were subjected to a heavy fusillade in the dark, in which Lance/Corporal Henry Fisher was shot in the leg and Privates Dave Miller and Herbert Gowlett were shot in the head, Len Corke shot in the jaw and Tom Benson and George Holland shot in the body. At 9 pm the Brigade was ordered to retired to the rear of Sheikh Abbas ridge leaving the 161st Brigade to watch the enemy, the camels and handlers had been brought up behind the ridge earlier that day at 2 pm and once the men were withdrawn they married up and mounted moving silently down to Charring Cross arriving at midnight.

      There was a strong sense of defeat amongst the men that night as they slowly rode back to Charring Cross in having survived the most harrowing experience of their lives, their fatigue and the loss of so many mates was a sober reminder to all of their own fallibility in this war.

      One of the tragic consequences of the battle were the innumerable wounded on the battlefield they were the most difficult to remove as there was so many that the Camel Brigade medical services of the Scottish Horse Field Ambulance were completely swamped and had to draw on the 54th Division for help. They also had a problem with casualties as both the 53rd and 54th Casualty Clearing Stations were overflowing regardless men were sent to them of whom Private Laurie Taylor died of his wounds at the 53rd CCS that night. It was well after midnight before all wounded could be recovered and cleared to the rear but still many had to be left as unrecoverable. Chaplain Hubert Gordon and Padre Scott-Little of the Camel Corps were conspicuous among the wounded that night adding what comfort they could while providing help to the strained medical staff.

      The 2nd Company had joined the Camel Brigade from Sollum on the 25th March with six officers and 163 men now it had all but ceased to exist and only Captain Campbell and five unwounded men remained out of the 105 that started the day, one of the most unfortunate members of the company to be killed was Private Alfred Armstrong was an original from the 7th Battalion AIF who had transferred to the Camel Corps and the 2nd Company in January 1916, he had the dubious honour to have been awarded 90 days field punishment No1 while his company was at Sollum.

      General Dobell had intended to continue the battle the next day but during the night reports came in from his Army showing the extent of the days sacrifice and with over 6500 men lost in his Infantry Divisions and the Desert Column convinced him that the prospects of a renewal of the battle had little success.

      In the Camel Brigade, the 1st Battalion was in critical shape having lost almost 70% of their men and only the strong 2nd Battalion with its four uncommitted companies and two companies of the 3rd Battalion were in any condition to continue the fight.

      On the morning of the 20th April the Brigade, less the two decimated companies of the 1st Battalion, formed up at 3.30 am and marched dismounted back to the southern side of Sheikh Abbas ridge, not far from Dumbell Hill to dig in, trenches were commenced with the help of engineers from the 54th Division, the 3rd Battalion now under the command of Major George Donovan was placed on the right and had a run in with some Turkish sentries in the dark during the erection a barbed wire fence, while the 2nd Battalion held the left flank and the remnants of the 1st Battalion in reserve.

      All day the troops waited under the scorching sun exposed to shell fire as the Turks waited to see if the British would attempt another attack, only their air force was busy coming over our lines photographing and dropping the odd bomb, still thanks to the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery, now acting as antiaircraft guns, they were kept at a distance. Late in the afternoon large bodies of the enemy were seen gathering at 5000 yards to the north and batteries of the 54th Division were directed on to them and any danger quickly disappeared.

      During the night of the 20/21st April the men worked on the defences and all posts were wired in and trenches completed as a cold wind now came from the sea making life uncomfortable in the trenches. As other day dawned on the unprotected ridge the Brigade was again subjected to a heavy bombardment in which a number of shells fell amidst the 2nd Battalion area, this unit had so far escaped serious casualties except at 6.15 am the 2nd Battalion now came in for special attention when enemy aircraft came over spotting for the artillery and a large number of shells fell on the locale killing six men and wounding  three officers and 10 men from the 9th company and Battalion signallers, including the Battalion Regimental Medical Officer Captain Collier and Lieutenant Marsh, along with the company commander Captain Charles Orchardson MC, who died from his wounds, among the wounded was Sergeant Maurice Bracey suffering from shell shock. Latter that morning at 7.15 an aircraft dropped bombs on the camel lines at El Kutshan killing a large number of animals along with Privates David Rees and Fred Southgate and five men were wounded of which Lance/Corporal Charles Holmes died of wounds.

      The Brigade waited in this exposed position on Sheikh Abbas ridge till the night of the 23rd April when the cameleers were relieved at 2 am by the 161st Brigade with the 1/7th Essex replacing the 2nd Battalion in the advanced position.

      The men moved back to Dumbell hill where they once again rejoined their animals, this time the Brigade proceed back across the Wadi Ghuzze via Tell el Jemmi then on to Abassan el Kerbir arriving at 7.30 am.

      Little is known today of the sacrifice by the men of the Camel Brigade on the Tank and Khirbet Sihan redoubts on the 19th April 1917 when the Palestine Campaign is mentioned only the swift moving columns of the Light Horse are brought to mind not the strange cadence of the Camel companies moving silently across the desert.

      Thus ended this tragic battle which had cost the Camel Brigade the greatest number of casualties suffered by Australian Mounted troops during the whole of the Palestine campaign and was only surpassed during the war with those suffered by the 3rd Light Horse Brigade at the Nek on Gallipoli were they lost 372 men out of 600 engaged. The Camel Brigade also lost the largest number of prisoners captured in battle during the campaign as well as the only Australian Mounted officer to be captured.

      The total casualties for the Camel Brigade very from sources and range from 370 killed and wounded from Captain J.R Hall on Brigade staff  to “Gulletts” Official history of 345, the British Official History lists all mounted troops together under the Imperial Mounted Division and give a total of 547, most of whom were from the Camel Brigade.

      The Camel Brigade War Diary Annex for the Battle list the casualties for the period from the 19th to the 22nd April as three officers and 41 men killed, 19 officers and 271 men wounded with one officer and 39 men missing total 374. In the War Diaries, the 1st Battalion reported the loss two officers and 30 men killed and 10 officers and 154 men wounded with one officer and 16 men missing total 213, while the 3rd Battalion does not list their casualties and the AIF Casualty Return for period list over 300 Australian casualties for the Camel Brigade but these include all causes including Prisoners of War.

      A search of the records showed that the Australians of the 1st Battalion lost at least 234 casualties with one officer (Captain Naylor) and 36 men were killed, 12 officers and 163 men wounded of which one officer (Lieutenant Hill) and eight men died from wounds. From the 1st Battalion a further one officer and 21 men were taken prisoner of which one officer (Lieutenant Fender) and 13 men were captured while wounded of which one officer and three men died from their wounds and a further three men died in captivity from cruel treatment or neglect.

      The worst affected units in the 1st Battalion were the 2nd company which lost 15 men killed and two officers and 73 men wounded of which two men died of wounds and one officer and nine men taken prisoner of which one officer and five men were captured while wounded, of these one officer and one man died of their wounds while in captivity and another one man died from cruel treatment, this totals 100 casualties for the company from about 105 present.

      The 3rd company lost one officer and 14 men killed and four officers and 49 men wounded of which four men died from wounds, there were a further 12 men taken prisoner of which 8 men were captured while wounded of which two men died from wounds and another two men died in captivity from cruel treatment, this totals 80 casualties for the company of 94 men and 180 casualties from approximately 199 men in the two Camel companies involved directly in the assault on Tank redoubt.

      The Australians from the 3rd Anzac Battalion lost at least 88 casualties with six men killed, three officers and 74 men wounded of which five men died from wounds. The 15th NZ Company records show that one officer (Roy Priest) and one man (Ernest Boys) was killed while 21 men were wounded of whom one man (Robert Woods) died from wounds. To this total we must also add the Battalion commander Lieutenant Colonel De Lancey-Forth as wounded he was British.

      The greatest loss in this Battalion was the 12th company which lost three men killed and three officers and 35 men wounded of which two men died from wounds, total 41 casualties.

      The British 2nd Battalion reported the loss of eight men killed with three officers and 25 men wounded of which one officer (Captain Orchardson) and two men died from wounds. One officer (Captain Collier) was an Australian doctor attached to the Battalion.

      The Hong Kong and Singapore Battery casualties were one officer (Lieutenant Chapman) and two men killed and one man died from wounds while other casualties were not reported, the Brigade Machine Gun Squadron did not report any losses.

      The Brigade also reported the loss of 176 camels during the Battle.

      A comparison between the two British Infantry Battalions involved directly in the assault on Tank Redoubt show they lost the following casualties;

      The 1/5th Norfolk’s (TF) Battalion lost seven officers (Lieutenant Colonel Grissell, Captain’s Beck MC, Birbeck, Cubitt, Lieutenant’s Gardiner, Plaistowe and Tebbutt) and 199 men killed in action with one officer (Lieutenant Hervey) and 17 men died from wounds while eight officers and 401 men were wounded and four officers and 229 men were reported as missing possibly all amoung the many dead with few as prisoners.

      The 1/8th Hampshire (Princess Beatrice’s) Battalion had a battalion strength of 23 officers and 746 men and lost eight officers (Captain’s Pittis MC, Seely, Lieutenant’s Attfield, Hills, King, Pakeman, Ratsey, and Shelton) and 177 men killed in action with 11 men died from wounds, while 15 officers and 298 men were wounded and four officers (Lt’s Atkin, Cox, Blofeld and Roberts) and 28 men were taken prisoner of which one officer (Lieutenant Blofeld) died from wounds while in captivity.

      The 11th Light Horse Regiment reported 11 men killed and six officers and 47 men wounded with 1 man wounded and taken prisoner. These casualties include Major Bailey wounded and although heavy for a Light Horse regiment all of these losses were incurred against the Atawine Redoubt, none being recorded near the Khirbet Sihan.

      Where as the Turkish casualties for the whole battle are recorded as 2013 with 402 dead and 1364 wounded and 247 missing, what the casualties were around Khirbet Sihan are unknown but the 53rd Turkish Division after this date had one of its regiments disbanded from the division and by the 3rd battle of Gaza had the 161st, 163rd and 79th Infantry Regiments.

  Demolition Raids?

  Beersheba

  Bald Hill (Hill 265)
    BATTLE OF BALD HILL

    By Steve Becker

    By the closing days of November 1917 the Camel Brigade had been in constant movement and action since the 29 October having advanced from Beersheba to Jaffa in about four weeks fighting a major battle and a number of skirmishes along the way, both animals and men were worn out. The camels unused to the hard rocky ground in Palestine then to the soft sands of the Sinai were tormented from sore feet which had crippled them by the hundreds and camel itch (a type of septic sore) had broken out and where the good old mange dressing was all that was keeping most alive still numerous animals had to be destroyed. All companies in the Brigade were suffering and they were now so reduced in both men and camels by disease and casualties that they were a shadow of their former selves.

    The Brigade at this time consisted of the following Troops;

    Camel Bde HQ

    Gen Smith VC

    2nd British Battalion

    LtCol Buxton

    7th Co

    Capt Gregory

    8th Co

    Capt Paterson

    9th Co

    Capt Newsam

    10th Co

    Capt Wilkinson

    3rd Anzac battalion

    LtCol DeLancey-Forth

    11th Co

    Lt Dixon

    12th Co

    Capt Norris

    13th Co

    Capt Nobes

    14th Co

    Capt Ranclaud

    4th Anzac Battalion

    LtCol Lee

    15th NZ Co

    Lt Black

    16th NZ Co

    Capt Yerex

    17th Co

    Capt Hampton

    18th Co

    Capt Howard

    26th MG Sqn

    Maj Millar

    Camel FA

    LtCol Arnold

    In the week following the battle at Khuweilfe the Camel Brigade was moved along the Palestine coast where the sandy soils of the coast were more agreeable to the animals then the hard ground of the mountains, there in support of the Yeomanry Division and the 52nd Division the Brigade fought and chased up the retreating 8th Turkish Army.

    On 13 November the 2nd British Battalion supported by the 4th Anzac Battalion assaulted the village of Yebna held by the 3rd Turkish Division 22nd Corps, the action was over quickly as the Turks retired before the Camel companies came into contact, however an unluckily HE shell fell into the 16th Company killing Private John Bugde and wounding five soldiers.

    During the 14 November the 2nd Battalion supported the New Zealand Mounted Brigade at Ayun Kara where the kiwi’s fought off a large force of the Turks. The 9th Company at Kubeibe was committed late in the day.

    Between the 16 and 17 November the Brigade was on the line Abu Shusheh to Barriye when they came under fire from the Turks, nevertheless no losses were recorded, and by the 19 November the Brigade was at Surafend.

    On the 22 November the Camel Brigade was attached to the Anzac Mounted Division under General Chaytor and ordered to move to Bald Hill to cover the right flank of the Desert Mounted Corps under General Chauvel on the Nahr El Auja line. This feature was 8 miles northeast of Jafa and the 2nd Battalion relieved the 7th Light Horse Regiment at 10 am and occupied a line from Yehudiyeh in the south tying in with the 1/4th Northamptonshire Battalion of the 54th Division at Wilhelma and the 5th Light Horse Regiment of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade in the north around Mulebbis who supplied and maintained mounted patrols covering the area around Bald Hill to the north and east.

    The 2nd Battalion started to dig positions along the Bald Hill feature which lay between Mulebbis and Yehudiyeh. The ground needed to be covered was extensive with only the Brigade Machine Gun Squadron had arrived as support, for the remainder of the Camel Brigade were still on the move up from the Plains of Sharon. The battalion occupied the following positions, the 8th Company under Captain Robert Paterson on the right over looking Yehudiyeh, the 7th company under Captain Fleming Gregory in the centre, and one section of the 10th company was on Bald Hill, the 9th company under Captain Arthur Newsam with three sections of the 10th company under Captain AG Wilkinson were held in reserve. The 5th Australian Light Horse regiment continued the line from the north of Bald Hill towards Mulebbis.

    On the 25 November the 4th Anzac Battalion arrived, taking over the Bald Hill defences at 8 am and relieved the 2nd Battalion which moved to Selmeh into reserve and was placed under orders to support the Anzac Mounted Division, while the balance of the Brigade bivouacked between Ibn Ibrak and Salmeh. The Camel Brigade was still without the support of any artillery as the Hong Kong and Singapore Battery had been attached to the Yeomanry Division on the 17 November and was now making their way to Jerusalem.

    Lieutenant Colonel Charles Lee Commanding the 4th Anzac Battalion deployed one section of the 17th Company on a commanding position to the extreme right in post 1 on Point 249 overlooking Yehudiyeh, the 15th NZ Company under Lieutenant Alexander Black was placed on the left flank around Bald Hill with two section each in posts 5 & 6 with post 5 on Bald Hill also called Point 265, the 16th NZ Company under Captain George Yerex provided three posts 2, 3 & 4 between these flanks taking in Yafa Hill and Point 266 and Point 286. The 18th Company under Captain Stan Howard with three sections of 17th company under Captain John Hampton and Battalion HQ were held in close reserve and dug in to the rear and south of Point 288 also called Lone Tree Hill or One Tree Hill, about 400 yards southwest of Bald Hill. No patrols were placed by the 4th Anzac Battalion, Lieutenant Colonel Lee instead relying on the 2nd Light Horse brigade to inform him of any Turks movement to his front by their standing patrols.

    Bald Hill was a large open whale-backed feature which dominated the surrounding area, it was exposed to all sides and little cover was available only a strip of cactus on the northern side, there were also a number of large Almond tree orchards around the area in front of Bald Hill which units of the Light horse were garrisoning. The main feature was broken by a re-entrant between Lone Tree Hill and Yafa Hill while a number of small wadis cut the surface between Bald Hill and Lone Tree Hill which was to its rear. Bald Hill was an important position in the defence of Jaffa as its loss and a Turkish breakthrough there would expose the Allied defences along the Nahr El Auja and force General Chauvel to retire south of Jaffa, and so it was vital that Bald Hill had to be held.

    By the end of November the Allied offensive around Jaffa was now wearing down as the threat moved towards Jerusalem. The German Commander General Von Falkenhayn was committed to relieving this pressure on his Seventh Army under Fevzi Pasha in its defence of Jerusalem and the Eighth Turkish Army under Kress Von Kressenstein was ordered to counterattack the exposed Allied line along the Northern flank. As new Turkish Divisions began to appear these enabled him to plan a number of attacks all along the Northern front particularly the area of Nahr El Auja where Colonel Refet Bey the commander of the 22nd Turkish Corps with the 20th and 16th Turkish Division’s were given the objective of Bald Hill and the surrounding area to cut off allied troops in the Nahr El Auja.

    The Veteran 20th Division under Lieutenant Colonel Yasin Hilmi and its Regiments, the 61st under Lieutenant Colonel Bahattin, the 62nd under Major Nazmi and the 63rd Turkish Infantry under Major Ahmet Muhtar with the 20th Artillery Regiment under Major Suleyman Avni had just arrived at the Palestine front fresh from its victories in Galicia where a special Storm Battalion of trained storm troops including flamethrowers and grenadiers were grouped from the 19th and 20th Turkish Infantry Divisions for the 15th Turkish Corps, it is not known if some of these troops were with the 20th Division, as most of the Storm Battalion were attached to the 19th Division during there attack against the 3rd Light Horse Brigade at El Burj probably something like a company of these trained assault troops appear to have been. The 16th Division was by this time exhausted by weeks of warfare having completed a fighting withdraw from Gaza and its Regiments the 48th, the 79th and 125th Turkish Infantry were all under strength nevertheless unquestioningly carried out their part in the following battle, attached to the 22nd Corps was the Austrian Orbus 73rd Heavy Artillery Battalion.

    The 20th Division completed their assembly into the area of Ras el Ain and Mejdel Yaba by the 25 November, and then began to filter into the area around Mulebbis fitting next to the 16th Turkish Division already in the line. The 2nd Light Horse Brigade had quickly detected them and engaged small groups of Turks on the 26 November and a force of four thousand Turks were observed moving in the area north the old Jewish colony of Mulebbis only the ground was cut by orchards and the main force was skilful enough to build up undisturbed for the attack.

    When the 4th Anzac Battalion had taken over its new area they commenced to dig their defences, however tools were short and only superficial work was completed on the trenches which had been dug in the stony ground still since the battalion was in support of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade and would probity move, not enough of the defences had been completed at the time of the attack. The departing British 2nd Camel Battalion had informed there relief that Mulebbis village, to there northern front was full of eggs, milk and oranges nonetheless patrols from the NZ companies failed to locate any, little knowing that the Turks had filtered into the town. For the last few days indications were seen that the Turks was planning something big as columns of transport could be seen in the distance, still no Turks were seen in front of Bald Hill and escaped detection by the Light Horse.

    At 6.15 am on the 27 November a intense concentrated barrage of Turkish artillery fell on Mulebbis, Bald Hill and on the 54th Division in the area of Wihelmia, the combined 4.2’s and 5.9’s of the 20th and 16th Turkish Artillery Regiments and the 73rd Heavy Artillery Battalion forced the troops to their trenches allowing a large force of around four thousand Turks to overrun and capture the town of Mulebbis from a thin skirmish line of the 6th Light Horse Regiment, who retired in front of them inflicting casualties on the Turks as they left an Almond orchard around the village. The Turkish artillery could be seen firing from the plain below while the movement of the Turks could be followed, still without any attached guns the Camel Brigade could do little to break them up. By 8.30 am a strong force of about 400 men from the 61st Turkish Infantry Regiment using this orchard as a forming up point attacked the exposed left flank of the 15th company on Bald Hill around Posts 5 and 6, the New Zealanders held their posts with difficulty as the Turks worked their way along both flanks, as an intense cross fire and bomb fight developed however in the end the section posts 5 and 6 were overrun or in the words of one kiwi “were compelled to retire” some time before 9 am.

    At Post 5 during this fight Lieutenant Clifford Gorringe 15th Company soon found he was driven out by this sudden attack, then at once counterattacked with the survivors, and directed fire on the exposed Turks and inspired his men with his bravery as this contest lasted for some time till he was wounded, shot in the head. The fighting was fierce around these exposed posts and Sergeant William Trott was shot in the thigh and Private Tom Boyd was shot in the back, while others were hit by shell fire of whom Sergeant George Parsons was hit by a splinter in the arm and Private Victor Wright in the leg, while Private Charles McArthur was seriously wounded and died later in the day. The garrison was slowly reduced by casualties then fearing encirclement the company was forced to give ground. Mean while at another post Sergeant Leslie Purves soon found him self cut off by both shell and machine gun fire and carried the seriously wounded Lieutenant Sam Gooding to the rear when the company was ordered to retire. This retirement happen abruptly and the company abandoned much equipment which could not be recovered as the men quickly moved to the reserve positions around Lone Tree Hill carrying their wounded and fighting as they moved.

    The sudden withdrawal by the 15th company put the entire Brigade defences in danger as the Turks were energetic to take advantage of the collapse around Bald Hill with the abandonment by the 15th company, which now exposed the 16th company, who had to fight the Turks attacking on their rear and flanks, no request for reinforcement or to retire was sent by Lieutenant Black to Lieutenant Colonel Lee and their collapse happen within half an hour of the first assault.

    With the left flank of the 16th Company now in the air, they continued to struggle during which Sergeant James Adams of 16th company was prominent in the action holding post 4 against heavy odds and suffering 50% casualties. Among the casualties was Private Ash Giles, who was shot in the arm and leg, and Corporal Percy Coxhead shot in the arm, still they continued to fight as the long morning dragged on.

    Around midday Lieutenant Colonel Lee became aware of the serious trouble with his command and realized that the 16th company was about to be surrounded and captured, regardless of holding on all morning, and now ordered posts 2, 3 and 4 held by the 16th company and a number of survivors of the 15th company to be abandoned before they were cut off. Despite the valiant defence by the New Zealanders its withdrawal resulted in a running fight in trenches and along a cactus hedge as the troops struggled to retire to the 18th Company positions in rear of Bald Hill near Lone Tree Hill.

    On arrival Trooper Robert Maxwell of the 16th company found his mate missing during the withdrawal and returned the 500 yards threw the Turkish positions found his mate and rescued him under the eyes of the Turkish troops and regaining the 18th company trenches to the cheers of his comrades.

    Part of the reason for the disaster that day was due to the lack of any artillery attached to the Camel Brigade, this had tragic consequences as the companies had been unable to break up the exposed Turkish concentrations before they reached our lines and when they reached our posts the overused New Zealand companies had little to stop the heavy flanking attacks on their exposed positions. Another reason for the collapse were the use of these new Storm Troops and tactics used by the Turks, who outflanked the posts and showered them with hand grenades while the defenders were kept to their posts by machine gun and artillery fire, this was assisted by five Taubes which were constantly over head observing for their guns which pounded our trenches continuously.

    By 12.30 pm all posts had been abandoned, other then one section of the 17th company which remained in post 1, casualties thought were not heavy with one man killed and two officers and 27 men wounded during in the action.

    As the exhausted troops reorganized, the Turks quickly occupied the vacant posts and turned Bald Hill into a fortress contending themselves with this valuable position instead of advancing towards Jaffa to complete their victory.

    At Corps headquarters the loss of Bald Hill caused considerable alarm and much finger pointing at the Camel Brigade and forced General Chaytor to order its immediate recapture, this was in part due to the problems on the right flank with the 1/4th Northamptonshire Battalion at Wilhelma and Yehudiyeh who were under heavy pressure from the 48th and 125th Turkish regiments (16th Division) which due to the withdrawal of the Camel Brigade on their left, were in danger of being overrun. General Smith was insistent that as a matter of honour an attack is put in before dark by Lieutenant Colonel Lee and the 4th Battalion was ordered to recover the ground abandoned during the day.

    Lieutenant Colonel Lee quickly began to organize this counterattack, to carry out his plan he had only the well-used 16th company, still they were familiar with the objective and were more then willing to regain their former posts, also the attacking force would have two sections each from the 17th and 18th company and a section from the newly arrived 7th company to carry out the attack while the remainder of the battalion was needed to occupy the defences. The 2nd Battalion had been released from the Anzac Mounted Division reserve at 10 am and ordered to move from Selmeh to the Camel Brigade’s exposed right flank to cover the area south from Yafa Hill and Wilhelma this allowed the 4th Battalion to concentrate for their counterattack. The 10th company relieved the single section of the 17th company at post 1 on Point 249 at 3 pm while the 7th company moved to support the 4th Battalion as the remainder of the 2nd Battalion dug support and reserve lines, the brigade machine gun squadron was committed to support the battalion, and Private William Gordon was killed by shell fire. By 7.30 pm patrols had reported the Turkish positions around the objectives and the attack went in at 8 pm in darkness.

    The 16th NZ Company was after blood since it was one of there own companies who had lost Bald Hill, still what followed during the night was confused and bloody fighting. Both 16th and 18th company advanced in line on section fronts in two lines supported by the 17th company and quickly overran the first line of Turkish posts which were held by only a thin skirmish line, however the higher the troops advanced the more exposed they became. The 16th company regained posts 4 and 3 below and to the right of Bald Hill at the point of the bayonet and much butchery. Sergeant James Adams was conspicuous in this work leading a bayonet charge only to be stabbed in the struggle with a Turk, and despite his serious wound, consolidated the position won and a prisoner and machine gun were taken, only to die later from his wounds. Private Carroll Sandford and Private Bob McSkimmer were also seriously wounded during the melee and soon died from their wounds. The 17th company now moved through the 16th company to recover post 2, with Lieutenant James Archibald, who led the section of the 7th company in the assault which assisted the 17th company regaining post 2 from the Turks on Yafa Hill, during which Private John Dunlop 17th Company was mortally wounded.

    As the men gained their 1st objectives, having retaken most of the posts abandoned earlier in the day it left only post 5 and 6 around Bald Hill to be recovered, still any advance by the two sections of the 18th company towards the top of the hill was meet with an overwhelming fusillade from hidden machine guns and riflemen.

    The cameleers found that the Turkish position was well defended, and any advance were exposed to the enemies cross fire, still the men struggled for over an hour supported by Lieutenant Ronald Mackenzie 16th company to gain this last post and regain their honour, in spite of everything it was for naught and about 9.15 pm the troops were ordered to retire to the positions already recovered. By 9.30 most of the lower trenches were cleared having recaptured most of the lost posts, other then the main positions on Bald Hill which held out against all efforts by the 4th Anzac Battalion and with casualties mounting Lieutenant Colonel Lee ordered all companies to hold what had been gained and to await the dawn. The Turks counterattacked during the night, still never in overwhelming numbers and with the help of a captured machine gun kept them at a distance.

    Once the warming rays of the mornings sun came out, patrols soon discovered that Bald Hill was now occupied by more than 500 Turks entrenched with Machine guns and was now too strong for the 4th Anzac Battalion to capture alone. Casualties in the 17th and 18th company numbered approximately 30 wounded while the losses in the 16th company were not recorded.

    General Smith realized that the hill and the Turkish penetration could just as well be contained and controlled by fire from three sides and rather then risk more lives in a direct assault against the salient in the line, he instead proposed to hold his present positions provided that he was given some artillery support, this was agreed to by both General Chauvel and Chaytor and the Camel Brigade took measures to hold what had been regained with artillery batteries from the 54th Division and the 2nd Light Horse Brigade now directed to support the Camel Brigade.

    While the battle was raging around Bald Hill on the 27 November the Turks had attacked in other areas along the front constantly probing for a weak spot along the Allied line, still all positions held and only Bald Hill was reported lost that day. The position of the 1/4th Northamptonshire Battalion at Wihelmia was controlled late in the day by a counterattack of the Brigade reserves and with the help of all batteries of the 54th Divisions artillery.

    In the morning of the 28 November the battle had quieted down until 10.20 am when post 1 was heavily shelled till 11.30 am, while the rest of the posts continued to be shelled through the day, mortally wounding Private Sid Coleman 18th company who was hit in the head, the Turks did not attack contending themselves on working on their defences and resting after a bitter night. At 8.50 pm that night the 4th Anzac Battalion was relieved by the 3rd Battalion which had been waiting in reserve, its companies had been hard hit in the fighting at Tel el Khuweilfeh and despite the reduced strength of the companies occupied all posts and extended the old trenches as well as exchanging fire with the ever observant Turks.

    The Camel Brigades position now had the 2nd Battalion south of Yafa Hill holding the right flank while over looking Willimina, next in line was the 3rd Battalion holding the old defences of the 16th company taking in Yafa Hill and Point 266 and Point 286 along the south-eastern part of Bald hill, then the 4th Battalion now concentrated around One Tree Hill. All battalions had dug both reserve and support trenches in depth and barbed wire were delivered and over the next few days the position was developed and extended. The 2nd Light Horse Brigade continued the line from One Tree Hill towards the Auja River and Tel Abu Zeitun.

    On the 29 November while the Turks again remained inactive during the day, other then their artillery which again shelled the posts searching with his guns along the trenches, during which Lieutenant Aubrey Bickford MC, Adjutant 3rd Battalion was wounded when hit in the right thigh by a piece of shrapnel. At the Camel Brigade HQ General Smith and Lieutenant Colonel Lee planned a raid for that night to bomb Turkish work parties which were active on the defences of Bald Hill, this in cooperation with a raid by the 6th Light Horse Regiment who were to assist with two troops (A and B Troops) from A Squadron under Captain Stuart Tooth and would advance from the north while the cameleers attacked from the south. The 2nd Battalion was asked to assist and Captain Fleming Gregory Commanding the 7th Company was ordered to send 2 sections to support the 4th Anzac Battalion by occupying the vacant posts, Captain Gregory instead decided to bring his whole company to help and was relieved by the 9th company that morning. During the afternoon the 7th company was hit by shell fire with one shell falling on a section of trench occupied by Fleming Gregory, a well liked British officer, killing him and wounding Lieutenant James Archibald and forcing Lieutenant John Bell-Irving to assume command of the company.

    Lieutenant Black’s reduced 15th company (about 60 men) was chosen to carry out the raid as it had held Bald Hill and knew the ground, and using the cover of the darkness moved up to the 3rd Battalion trench near post 4, which were the closest to the Turkish works on Bald Hill. At 10 pm an artillery barrage from B Battery HAC and the Inverness Battery fell on Bald Hill and under cover of this fire the New Zealanders of the 15th company moved forward at the rush with the bayonet and were met by the Turks with bomb and bayonet as a desperate fight developed when the New Zealand troops drove the Turks up the hill where stores lost on the 27 November by their company were recovered, still once near the top of Bald Hill they found Turkish resistance growing.

    It appears at the same time the cameleers and Light Horse had attacked Bald Hill a Turkish force of 300 men were about to commence their own attack and the 6th Light Horse ran into them forcing both forces to go to ground as they became strongly engaged firing at each other in the dark, two other ranks (Ray Bloodworth and Henry Christie A Troop) were killed and Lieutenant Robert Ronald A Troop with a number men were wounded as the 6th Light Horse was forced back on their supports exposing the 15th company which despite its success had been ordered to retire at the completion of its task, the company retired back to their trenches as fighting went on during the night as the Turks shelled the 2nd Light Horse brigade and Camel Brigade defences and the night sky was lit by the flashes of exploding shells and flares till around midnight when the firing died down. All of the 15th company where safely back in the 3rd Battalion trench by 2.20 am having suffered few casualties during the night.

    In morning of the 30 November the troops stood to arms however the Turks made no attempt to attack, nevertheless artillery fire on both sides increased and any movement attracted the keen eye of Turkish spotters on top of Bald Hill. To the north the night battle between the 6th Light Horse and the Turkish forces continued and the Turks who had gained a number of posts from the 6th Light Horse during the night now found themselves exposed and with help from C Squadron 7th Light Horse under Major Nat Barton counterattacked capturing two officers and 146 Turkish soldiers and four new Bergman type 15 Light machine guns and winning Lieutenant Gilbert Finlay DCM the Military Cross.

    The afternoon pasted with insignificant fire as the Turks appeared demoralized by the night and morning battles, this respite allowed the men to continue working on the defences and permitted the companies to be relieved as the terrain around Bald Hill took on the appearance of the battlefields of France with large areas of trenches and wire began to appear as the companies pushed forward constructing new lines and tying in all posts held. The night of the 30 November pasted without any major fighting instead both sides contending to improve their positions as snipers ruled the dark. It was during this time that the 63rd Turkish Regiment relieved the fatigued 61st Regiment in the firing line taking over the line from Bald Hill to the Auja River while the 62nd Regiment continued the line to the area of the 16th Division around Wihelmia.

    The first day of December was also quite, other then Turkish snipers and between 4.30 and 6 am the men stood to before commencing the day’s activities. The odd burst of artillery fire which all to often betrayed that intrepid person trying to move around the battlefield was all to be heard as the work continued on the defences, which around Lone Tree Hill was turned into a redoubt and new works were commenced during the day and those men not working tried to rest in the shade of their trenches from the burning sun.

    German aircraft were active helping the long range artillery by spotting and one salvo scored hits on the camel lines near Brigade HQ at Ibn Ibrak and Sakia killing Lieutenant Horace Hallam R.A.S.C the Brigade Admin Officer and a large number of animals which were barracked in close formation near the watering point. The 3rd Battalion still working on the new works was shelled heavily late in the day wounding two men and damaging the posts, Private Harold Cummin 11th Company, was evacuated to the 2nd Light Horse Field Ambulance, only to die from his wounds that night. Once darkness came the Turks were heard working on their defences as snipers came out to snipe at the men of whom Private John Currie of the Brigade machine gun squadron was killed.

    The 2 December was again quite other then irregular shelling of all posts as most of the troops tried to rest after a night of work parties, which had kept most busy doing what labour could not be done during the day, and Lieutenant Leslie White 11th Company was wounded during this exchange. Turkish long range artillery was still used to keep the supply columns under fire disrupting the resupply of the forward companies. The Camel Corps Field Ambulance had been busy over the week administering and recovering the wounded, while doing this valiant work under fire, two of its doctor’s Captain’s Henry Dolman and Sam Seccombe, along with Private Edward McMahon, a stretcher bearer, were themselves wounded on the 27 November when an enemy plane came over machine gunning the wounded around the Field Ambulance and where because of over crowding a number of the wounded were recovered to the 2nd Light Horse Field Ambulance who had set up a clearing station for both Brigades. The night was quite as the work continued on the defences repairing damage extending and improving the posts.

    On the 3 December after stand to, another raid was ordered to take place that night, Lieutenant Colonel Lee alerted the 17th company, being the strongest company remaining in the Battalion, to move up to post 9, situated in the 3rd Battalion trenches, that afternoon, and the 18th company was alerted to support if needed. The plan was for the company to discover how strongly the enemies position were held, and three officers were attached to inspect the defences and report on them, as the force was only to be in the enemies trenches for 10 minutes before returning. The attached officers were Lieutenant Richard Camm, sent to see how many men could be held in the Turkish trenches, Lieutenant Vic Adolph, to see at what stage the Turks were at in their construction and Lieutenant Edward O’Keefe 18th Company, to check their observation posts.

    The attacking company could muster six officers and 100 other ranks (with the three attached officers) to carry out the raid, the foray was to attack from the south, the same direction used on the 29 November, and a similar raid was once more planned by the 6th Light Horse to support, this raid, it was composed from A and C Squadron under Captain Doug Close with five officers and 100 men. Lieutenant Adolph the 4th Anzac Battalion intelligence officer carried out a reconnaissance of the Turkish position in the afternoon and at 7.40 pm the 17th company left its trench moving up a small nullah from post 9 to a form up point within 300 yards of the Turkish line allowing the troops to line the nullah till the artillery fell at H Hour.

    At 7.55 pm after a 10 minute bombardment, Captain John Hampton signalled the attack allowing the men time to reach the trenches before the guns would be switched to cut off the Turks escape to the rear, while the Brigades machine guns would support the main attack. The 17th company started to advance in line on a section front in three waves, the Battalion Padre Captain Ignatius Bossence joined with the attacking force setting a fine example to the men, however again things began to go wrong from the start.

    The Turks quickly recognized that an attack was coming, and moved out of their trenches into no mans land to escape the worst of the shell fire, which allowed them time to prepare for the attack. The attacking company ran straight into a prepared Turkish defence and a bayonet fight ensued as a line of spider holes were found 50 metres from their front line containing a skirmish line of Turks, they showered the men with bombs inflicting a large number of casualties before they were all killed, still not before disorganizing and delaying the assault. Meanwhile on the left flank the 6th Light Horse found they had been blasted out of their positions by what they believed to be a defective gun which was short shooting, they lost about 23 men wounded before the barrage lifted disorganizing their attack.

    The main Turkish line was then attacked only the Turks opened with shell fire onto their own position and the cameleers could make no head way against a stiffening Turkish line, which by chance, had missed the intended point of entry and so lost the full benefit of supporting artillery and machine gun fire. The cameleers tried moving along the outer line to find a weak spot to break in and capture the Turkish posts still no where they could gain a foot hold.

    Adding to their problems that night were two of the three officers attached to look at the Turkish defences, now found themselves wounded during the wild fight along the outer trenches and two sections of the 18th company were committed until they at last gained entry into the objective, which allowed only a brief inspection before the whistle was blown to order the retirement.

    With the raid now completed Captain Hampton ordered all troops back to the start point, with the 10 minutes allowed for the raid long passed. When the troops retired machine guns from the 3rd Battalion opened on the enemies defences which prevented the recovery of all the wounded. Captain Hampton stayed to help and his direction of the withdrawal enabled all of the wounded to be recovered with the help of Sergeant Lionel Towner who rescued a number of men in front of the Turkish trenches, they were the last men to return with the Padre who went among the troops and wounded keeping their spirits up, and by 9.40 pm all had returned other then Lieutenant Adolph who stayed to complete a final check on the enemies works before arriving back carrying a wounded man. Only one man was believed left in the Turkish’s trenches and he had been killed and could not be recovered. The Turks still alarmed by the raid continued to shell the area till 10 pm when all fell silent.

    The 6th Light Horse to the north had still advanced at H hour plus 10 and reached their objective bayoneting 20 Turks from the 2nd Battalion 57th Regiment, where they stayed long enough in the Turkish’s trenches to capture three prisoners from the 57th Regiment and one prisoner from the 1st Battalion 52nd Regiment and some rifles before returning with the required information with the loss of one officer (Owen Tooth) and one other rank (Brian Barton) killed and one officer (Norman Dickson) and 22 men wounded.

    The casualties in the 17th company were reported as two other ranks killed (Albert Cox and James Fairbairn) while Corporal Henry Johnson died of wounds on the battlefield and four officers and 32 men were wounded, in the 18th company Sergeant Albert Chard was killed when hit in the head by a piece of shell fragment while waiting in support and 16 men wounded. Captain Graham Shipway the Battalion medical officer worked tirelessly throughout the night dispatching the casualties back to the rear, clearing all the wounded, by 2 am a further four men died of their wounds that night or over the next few days (Bill Bryce, Archie Duncan, Elias Pryor and Harry Punshon).

    Defending Bald Hill at this time was the 63rd Turkish Infantry Regiment under Major Ahmet Muhtar, who reported coming under heavy artillery and machine gun fire around 8.30 pm, when an ambush attack was conducted on them, which they controlled the battle after a counterattack was sent in by the reserves of the Regiment. Facing the 6th Light Horse Regiment were elements of the 2nd Battalion 57th Regiment under Ali Bey to the north of Bald Hill, when their posts were attacked. Post 1 (containing 18 men) was hit hard by shell fire, and post 2 (with 20 men and two machine guns) was to the right near the road, while post 3 was held by 20 men from the 52nd Regiment. Ali Bey was in post 1 when the attack began and he at once sent a messenger for the reserves in post 4, however the messenger was killed. Ali Bey then requested help from post 2, who sent half there strength (10 men) to post 1, which now contained around 28 men. The garrison of post 1 was taken by surprise, when the Light Horse found the Turks with there heads down due to the artillery fire, killing or capturing all including Ali Bey. A reinforcement of 90 men under a Sergeant were dispatch to retake post 1, only to be hit by artillery fire which killed or wounded many of the men and broke up this move allowing the Light Horse to retire with there prisoners.

    The 4 December passed quietly, other then the odd shell fire, when at 3 pm three German planes appeared overhead resulting in a storm of fire on all posts along the line till it eased off at 5.30 pm. One gun continued to fire during the night at post 10 in the 2nd Battalion area with one shell every 10 minutes and Turkish snipers were out in force till 11 pm when all went quiet.

    The 2nd Battalion in the meanwhile had spent the last week covering Yafa Hill and other then suffering heavily artillery fire had not been attacked, the Battalion had supported the 54th Division on their right with fire during the emergency late on the 27 November only most of the time contending themselves with holding three posts with half companies and providing fire support for the 3rd Battalion on the left and the 54th Division at Yehudiyeh and Wilhelma.

    On the 5 December the front line was relieved at 11 pm by the Auckland Mounted Rifles as the Brigade exchanged with the New Zealand Mounted Brigade. That night as the led camels were brought up and they prepared to leave the Turks constantly on the alert detected the movement and shelled all positions of whom three men were reported killed, however two men can be confirmed in the records (Arthur Peace 18th Company and Tom Bedelph Canterbury Mounted Rifles) with a number of animals. While waiting for the relief Private John Romaro was sent from the 3rd Battalion HQ with a camel and cachalots to pick up two wounded men, during his movement to the front missed the posts and wandered lost into the Turkish defences and soon found him self captured by a German Staff officer and Staff on a reconnaissance.

    The Camel Brigade once relieved moved back passed Jaffa through thick mud as it had now begun to rain in buckets and the men and animals struggled passing the plains of Sharon and Gaza back to Shellal arriving 2 pm on the 11 December for a well errand rest.

    One of the sad results of this battle happened two days after the Brigades return to Shellal when a Court of Inquiry was held into the loss of Bald Hill, its loss had caused some concern at GHQ and held Lieutenant Colonel Lee and Lieutenant Alexander Black, the Commanding Officer of the 4th Anzac Battalion and Officer Commanding 15th NZ Company, responsible for its capture, Lieutenant Colonel George Langley said its loss had been due to Lee not putting out patrols or forming an outpost line from the main posts on the 27 November to warn of the enemies approach, while others said that there was the problem of the tactical position occupied by the battalion in that the posts were not properly dug or wired allowing the Turks to drive the garrisons out by strong artillery fire. Only it should be said that Lee and his battalion didn’t expect to stay long in the position they were in, having been on the move for a month they believe that they would again be on the move, also they were only in support of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade and possibly that was the reason for all companies not digging in appropriately. Whether he was to blame for the loss or not is hard to say still the court of inquiry found Lieutenant Colonel Lee responsible and he was replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Mills MC, who was promoted and posted from the 1st Battalion and took command on the 14 December 1917, while Lee, the son of a well known New England politician was returned to Australia, and Lieutenant Black was also replaced and returned to New Zealand.

    On the 1 January the 3rd Battalion now reduced through illness and casualties were sent back to the Canal, the 13th company not having been heavily engaged over the last month was sent to the 4th Battalion on the 30th December replacing the reduced 15th (NZ) company which returned with the 3rd Battalion. The 1st Battalion arrived from the Canal on the 16th January with strength of 23 officers and 660 other ranks.

    Total Brigade casualties for the month of November were recorded in the War Diary as five officers and 23 other ranks killed, 12 officers and 109 other ranks wounded and two missing, most of these losses were at Khuweilfe earlier in the month.

    The Battle casualties for December at Bald Hill were reported as two officers and five other ranks killed, seven officers and 44 other ranks wounded and three missing.

    The brake down of casualties for the Battalions at Bald Hill is harder to uncover for the 2nd Battalion reported only one officer (Captain Gregory) and one man killed and one officer and six men wounded with one other rank dying of wounds, still neither were they heavy engaged over the month.

    New Zealanders of 15th and 16th company reported only one other rank killed and two officers and 16 men wounded of who one officer (Lieutenant Gooding) and six other ranks died of wounds, this would seem erroneous as 27 men were reported casualties on the 27 November, and probity many of these remained with their units.

    The Australians of the 3rd and 4th Anzac Battalions had lost six other ranks killed while six officers and 67 other ranks were reported wounded, of whom 11 other ranks died of wounds, two other ranks were reported missing, of which one was known captured, the other killed in action and left in the Turkish trenches.

    The 26th Camel MG Company reported two men killed and one officer and three other ranks wounded, of which one died of wounds.

    From the Camel Brigade HQ, one officer was killed (Lieutenant Hallam).

    It appears he was not killed at Bald Hill, so I would check the rolls of the Berkshire Yeomanry during this peroid as he may have returned to them and was killed during the advance to Jerusalem.

    But I am still to find all the casualties for the 2nd Bn during this battle (only one officer (Captain Gregory) and one man killed and one officer and six men wounded with one other rank dying of wounds).

    Macfarlane James 13411 L/Cpl ICC on War Memorial as 2Bn ICC Ex 1/1st Ayrshire Yeo to 12Bn Royal Scots Fusiliers buried Jerusalem War Cemetery KIA 8-12-17

    Gregory Fleming Clement Capt OC 7Co 8-16 to 11-17 MC Ex 1/3 County of London Yeo buried Ramleh War Cemetery Palestine DoW 29-11-17

    Peigon FP Capt 2Bn unknown possibly Capt Fleming Gregory DoW 29-11-17

    Collier Willliam Tregonwell Dr Capt RMO attch 2Bn MC MID WIA back shrapnel Ex RAMC to 15 GH to 88 GH WIA 19-4-17 WIA 27-11-17
    Archibald James 2/Lt 7Co 3-17 MC - for his actions in charge at Yahudiey (Yafa Hill) 27-11-17 to UK leave 10-18 Ex Sgt 1/3 Scottish Horse (118) DCM and Hussars WIA 29-11-17

    Known Berkshire Yeomanry in the ICC;

    Armstrong Frank 50100 Pte ICC 8Co? Ex CSqn/Berkshire Yeo (1879) and Hussars
    Bellenger Thomas H. 50028 Pte ICC Ex 2 Troop DSqn/Berkshire Yeo (1711) and (70286)
    Bennett Arthur Charles 50101 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2681) and Dragoons (70612) NKG listed on the Jerusalem War Memorial KIA 27-3-18
    Blyde Hubert Cave Lt 2Bn MC Ex Berkshire Yeo to Capt 101 MG Bn
    Clarke Edward J. 51422 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2983) and Hussars
    Eggleton Edwin T. 50103 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2754) and Hussars (327151)
    Elbro William C. 51118 Sgt ICC Ex Berkshire Yeo (2813) and Worcester Yeo (327190)
    Fisher Sydney 50104 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2772) and Hussars
    Freeman Harold Geoffrey 1683 CQMS ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo and Hussars (70280) disch 26-6-17 to RFC prom 2/Lt
    Funnell John C 50105 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2195) and Hussars
    Gosling Francis Moss 50106 Pte 8Co Ex 1/1 Berkshire Yeo (2817) and Hussars
    Grover Walter J. 50107 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2818) and Worcester Yeo (327119)
    Hawkins Edward 50124 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2684) and Worcester Yeo (327145)
    Herbert George 50125 Pte ICC 8Co? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2737) and Hussars
    Hermon Arthur William 50008 Sgt 8Co T/CSM DCM Ex Berkshire Yeo (1857) and Hussars
    Hodges Horace John 50109 Pte 8Co Sig Ex Berkshire Yeo (1730) and Dragoons NKG listed on the Jerusalem War Memorial KIA 1-5-18
    Holloway William C 50111 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2728) later RE WR/195655) WIA 27-3-18
    Home Stanley T 50126 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (1784) and Hussars
    Hooker Robert H 50110 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (1884) and Hussars WIA 27-3-18
    Inchbald Geoffrey Herbert Elloit Lt 8Co 5-16 to OC 8Co 4-18 to 6-18 Ex 1/1 Berkshire Yeo WIA 1-5-18
    Jackson Albert W. 51421 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2626) and Hussars
    Johnson James 50127 L/Cpl 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (1713) and Hussars WIA 28-3-18
    King Reginald C. 50112 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2793) later RE (495715)
    Langford Alfred 50113 A/Cpl 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2621) and Hussars (50113)
    Lee William A. 50184 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2252) later Essex Regt (302562)
    Luff Thomas 50003 Cpl ICC Ex ASqn/Berkshire Yeo (1741) and Hussars (327114)
    Mercer John 50114 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2779) and
    Millar Thomas CR 50115 L/Cpl 8Co or 7Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2070) and Hussars and Dragoons (70095) WIA 27-3-18 DoW 31-3-18
    Munday Dick 50017 L/Cpl 8Co MID Ex Berkshire Yeo (2628) and Hussars brothers Thomas and Harry
    Munday Harry 50116 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (911) and Hussars brothers Thomas and Dick
    Munday Thomas 50130 Pte ICC 8Co? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2629) and Hussars brothers Harry and Dick
    Murray John P. 50932 Pte ICC Ex Berkshire Yeo (2822) and Hussars
    Neville Percy C 50117 Pte 8Co batman to Lt Inchbald Ex Berkshire Yeo (2738) and Hussars
    Nottidge Thomas Lt 10Co to CTU 9-18 Ex 2/Lt Life Guards to T/Capt Berkshire Yeo to Capt Saff
    Painter John 50120 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (2790) and Hussars to Dragoons (70691) died dysentry buried Port Said War Cemetery Egypt DoD 19-11-17
    Penford Frederick J 50118 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (1404) and Hussars WIA 27-3-18
    Pope Charles 50011 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2261) and Hussars
    Priddy Samuel L. 50131 A/Cpl ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (1962) and Hussars
    Rhodes James T. 50119 Pte ICC 8Co Sig Ex 3/1 Berkshire Yeo (2696) and Hussars
    Robson Jack 50128 Pte ICC? Ex Berkshire Yeo (70445) and Hussars
    Sims Harry W 1772 Pte 8Co Ex City of London Yeo (1772) and Berkshire Yeo and Hussars (327631)
    Stagg Thomas EH 50122 Pte ICC 8Co? Ex Berkshire Yeo (2710) and Hussars
    Stevenson Vivian McG 50007 Pte ICC Ex ASqn/Berkshire Yeo (1740) and Hussars
    Trouncer Thomas Geoffrey Beauchamp Capt CTC to 1 Donkey Transport Co to RASC Ex 2/Lt Berkshire Yeo
    Walters Dudley 50123 Pte 8Co Ex Berkshire Yeo (1887) and Hussars WIA 27-3-18

  Recuperation

  Raid on Amman (present - yes he was with his unit- but was the 15th Coy at Amman? I don't think so)
    From a Steve Becker Forum post:
    Mate,

    This is a chapter of a book I was writting which covers this battle from the ICC point of view, it should help with the details of this mans death?

    The last paragrph covers how so many deaths were recorded as MIA or NKG.

    "BATTLE OF AMMAN
    By Steve Becker
    .

    With the fall of Jericho on the 12 March 1918 the Jordan Valley was now firmly under British control and this victory along with the success of the Arab Army under the Emir Feisal with the capture of Aqaba had enabled General Allenby to make plans to draw the Turkish Army away from his exposed northern flank by a raid on the Turkish supply and communications base at Amman.

    This raid would have many benefits to the Allied cause, first it would unite both British and Arab forces which up too now had been fighting a separate war, secondly it would help Feisal by drawing the present Turkish forces engaged in fighting the Arab Army back to Amman leaving Feisal free to capture Maan and to advance on Amman, thirdly draw Turkish forces away from any planned offensives and lastly it could destroy enough of the Hejaz Railway to put this vital line of transportation out of the war for some time.

    General Allenby entrusted this important operation to General J.S. Shea (commander of the 60th Division) which was christened “Shea’s Force”. It consisted of the Australian and New Zealand (Anzac) Mounted Division under General Chaytor, the 60th Infantry Division, with the Camel Brigade and the IX Mountain Artillery Brigade. General Shea was instructed by General Allenby to first secure the passage of the Jordan River by the 19th March then to bridge the river and advance on and capture Es Salt with his infantry then push his cavalry onto Amman to destroy the railway with particular attention of the Viaduct bridge and tunnel with other bridges both north and south were also to be destroyed, some 20,000 men were promised by the Beni Sakhr Arabs to assist the operation nevertheless at no time did any arrive.

    The Camel Brigade since the disastrous months of November and December had under gone an urgent period of rest and recovery. The men in preparation for the coming operations had been sent on long route marches into the desert in order to build up their endurance, while the Brigade formed a number of demolition teams under Royal Engineer (RE) officers for the coming offensive. The Brigade also underwent a period of reorganization as a number of companies were reduced from the untenable strength of six officers and 179 men to five officers and 129 men by reducing the number of soldiers within the sections, the Battalion Headquarters still retained a strength of five officers and 22 men while demolition teams were formed from the surplus of one officer and 24 men.

    The Brigade at this time consisted of the following troops;

    Camel Bde HQ BrigGen Smith

    1st Anzac Battalion LtCol Langley 1st Co Lt Nicholson
    Maj Nobbs (2ic) 2nd Co Capt Mills
    3rd Co Capt Hogue
    4th Co Capt Denson

    2nd British Battalion LtCol Buxton 7th Co Capt Deas
    Maj Day (2ic) 8th Co Capt Tredinnick
    9th Co Capt Newsom
    10th Co Lt Lyall

    4th Anzac Battalion LtCol Mills 13th Co Capt Howard
    Maj Hemphill (2ic) 16th NZ Co Capt Yerex
    17th Co Capt Hampton
    18th Co Maj Kessels

    HKSB Maj Moore
    26 MG Sqn Maj Millar
    Camel FA LtCol McLaren


    On the 10 March the Camel Brigades advance party left Sheial and moved up to Bethlehem with the balance of the Brigade following over the next few days, they’re concentrating on the 18th March, this short stay enabled the men to visit the many Christian sites in the area.

    The Turkish Armies since November had been steadily rebuilding their forces along a wide front from Jaffa to Amman, however General Liman Von Sanders had little to stop any British advance directed on Amman whose garrison called the East Jordan Group or to the Turks, the Seria Group of the 48th Division HQ under Lieutenant Colonel Asim Bey consisted only a few companies of the 3rd Battalion 150th Regiment (48th Division) which also manned a number of guard posts along the Hejaz Railway. These forces were divided into two areas, the Northern group under Lieutenant Colonel Omer Lutfu Bey commanding officer of the 126th Infantry Regiment (11th Division) covering Es Salt and Ghoraniye
    with only the second battalions from the 150th (48th Division) and 159th Regiments (24th Division) with a battery of guns and the southern Group under Captain Ahmet Bey covering south of Ghoraniye with some irregular Circassian Cavalry with the 48th Divisional Cavalry Squadron and a Camel Company covered the area from Amman to the Jordan River.

    The largest Turkish Forces in the area were in the south fighting the Arabs, known as the Tafila Force this was a formidable unit strong in machine guns and contained the German 703rd Battalion of the German Asia Corps which unknown to British was returning to Amman on the 21 March, the Turkish forces arrayed to stop Allenby numbered not more then two thousand fighting men and 10 guns however with the railway working reinforcements could be quickly rushed to any threatened point once its direction was known.

    As the time of the raid approached the weather began to turn difficult with heavy falls of rain over the area of operations flooding the Jordan River, this caused delays as the pontoon bridge could not be started by the Engineers and the Light Horse Field Troop Bridging Train till the waters had slowed down enough to lay the pontoons, this transpired late on the 20 March and all was ready on the night of the 21 March.

    On that date General Shea concentrate his forces and during the next few days while the 60th Division battled for a crossing over the Jordan River while the Anzac Mounted Division rested at Tal’at ed Damm in reserve.

    The Camel Brigade had begun moving from Bethlehem on the 21 March arriving at Tal’at ed Dumm on the 23 March, where the Brigade rested and prepared of its turn to cross the Jordan River, it had twelve companies all of which were up to strength from the reorganization and reinforcements, most men were in good sprits having visited the birth place of Jesus. The troops were under strict orders to be careful of the Arab tribes, many of who were being won over to the Sheriff of Mecca, this was hard on some of the cameleers as they had been robbed and seen their mates killed and stripped by these “jackals of the desert”. At 7.30 pm the Brigade started to move towards the Jordan River, passing Jericho till they reached the assembly area in the early morning.


    By the 24 March all was ready and the Anzac Mounted Division crossed the Jordan River with the Camel Brigade crossing before midday. Once over the river Shea’s Force split into three groups in which to carry out their tasks. The Camel Brigade was concentrated by 5.30 pm at Tel el Muslim and moved off with the Anzac Mounted Division HQ and 2nd Light Horse Brigade and the New Zealand Mounted Brigade towards Amman on the Na’ur and Ain es Sir track while the 1st Light Horse Brigade and 179th Brigade of the 60th Division took up a blocking position in the Jordan Valley while the 180th and 181st Brigades of the 60th Division along with the 10th, 12th and 16th Mountain Batteries of the IX Mountain Artillery Brigade Royal Garrison Artillery moved north to Es Salt.

    As the lead units pushed on at 6.15 pm, the track to Na’ur soon disappeared under the hoofs of the Light Horse and Mounted Brigades till it resembled only a goat path, an unfortunate delay occurred. It had been reported that the Na’ur track was fit for wheeled vehicles, however it was soon apparent that the many stores, ammunition limbers and guns could not travel on the track and had to be sent back to the river to be loaded on animals of the Camel Transport Corps of which the Anzac Mounted Division had been supplied with three Companies each of 550 camels. Meanwhile the Mounted troops pushed on to Ain el Hekr south west of Na’ur, while the Camel Brigade waited until eight pm for the stores to be packed before starting up the trail, the rear of the column leaving after 10 pm The rain began to fall as the brigade moved slowly along the narrow path while the Light Horse moved briskly ahead arriving in Ain el Hekr at 4.30 am on the 25 March.

    The terrain between Amman and the Jordan Valley was known as the Moab it was made up of a number of deep Valleys cut by centuries of rain with steep hills rising to 4000 feet, a number of small villages dotted the area the largest of which was Es Salt with a pre-war population of around 10,000. This rugged terrain was in March dry however the late rains had filled the waddies and turned the tracks to mud which quickly dissolved with the movement of large numbers of troops and animals.

    As the Light Horse and Mounted Brigades arrived in Na’ur the Camel Brigade was still struggling up those terrible mountains with the wind, rain and sleet blowing into their faces which dropped the temperature and made the going difficult for the men and animals. Through this mud and slippery rocks on which the camels had trouble maintaining their footing and where the camels often fell splitting themselves in two and forcing a large number to be put down while others collapsed and fell over the cliffs falling to their death. All this presented the most distressing sight as the Camels could barely move and had to be pushed along by the men who now walked by the side of their tormented mounts in mud up to their knees as they slipped, staggered and floundered up and down the mountains. One Veterinary Sergeant was in tears in seeing the suffering and having to dispatch a crippled camel with a knife as no shooting was allowed. Onwards they went through the night in single file leading and dragging the animals and at 7.30 am the leading companies staggered into Na’ur in an exhausted and dirty state. It had taken more than twenty-four hours to cover the 16 miles from the Jordan River when the head of the column reached the plateau around two am the rear did not catch up till 7.30 pm

    At Na”ur the 5th Light Horse Regiment had arrived short of forage and food, the men having consumed there available rations over the last few days and with their supplies now held up on the track the Camel Brigade kindly gave two days supply of its doura to feed their hungry animals and rations for the men from the limited supplies carried on their camels. The men said this food distribution was levied on them however all were glad to give to their brothers in the Light Horse, this levy would continued through out the campaign leaving the Camel Brigade without rations by the end of the battle and then all went without.

    Warrant Officer class 2 George Hughes the Temporary/Regimental Quarter Master Sergeant of 4th Anzac Battalion and now temporary Quarter Master was over the next few days kept busy trying to move supplies up to the troops and to make sure the men under his charge had enough food, ammunition and stores to continue the fight. This Herculean task by the supply units broke down later in the week with the sad result of leaving few units with food or ammunition.


    During the night of the 25 March the forces pushed on to the Ain es Sir cross roads with long columns of cameleers travelling in single file trying not to lose the rider in front while others succumbed to their exhaustion and were asleep, yet the animals continued to saunter onwards taking care not to wake their riders. Arriving by the morning of the 26 March with a heavy rain still falling and the Camel Brigade again drenched and worn out, where an exhausted cameleer said that “1000 acres of this country wasn’t worth a hot glass of Cairo beer” while another mentioned that “he was surprised the Jews wanted it back” another said “it was the most trying time he had ever known” such was the morale of these fine troops that even in this fatigued state they could find time for a joke.

    This last movement to Ain es Sir had been made along the high plateau know as the Gilead where the ground had now levelled out and notwithstanding this General Chaytor GOC of the Anzac Mounted Division decided it was impossible to push on to Amman that day as both men and animals were exhausted after three consecutive night marches. The troops, saturated through were allowed to rest on the sodden ground, no fires were allowed and while these men rested the remainder of the Camel Brigade slowly struggled in. One officer from the 2nd Battalion told how after 72 hours on the move he was one of the lucky few who managed to sleep for 17 hours that day while others were fortunate to get four hours.

    On the morning of the 27 March the sun came out as the force set off at 8.30 am. The Camel Brigade had detached the 4th Anzac Battalion (less the 18th company) to follow in the path of New Zealand Mounted Brigade along with their demolition party for a strike on Quseir Station which lay three and a half miles south of Amman, while the main body of the Brigade moved past Ain Amman with the 2nd Battalion arriving outside Amman at 10 am.

    The approach march to Amman was made along the old Roman road known as the Ain es Sir - Amman track which follows the Wadi Amman to the Citadel, an old Roman Fort in the middle of the City of Amman, on the right of the advance was Hill 3039, this large feature dominated the area south of Amman and it was separated from the road by the Wadi Amman which continued up to Ain Amman, Hill 3039 was made up of the high point and a number of smaller hills the largest of which was Kh Aishe. While on the left of the road was a long plateau which rose to the height of 2828 feet along which ran the Es Salt - Suweile track to the north, another wadi separated the road from the plateau in which were cut a number of natural caves.

    Lieutenant Colonel Robin Buxton dismounted and deployed the 2nd Battalion up on the level plain near Kusr which was around 2000 yards from Amman, while the 1st Battalion under the acting command of Captain Herbert Denson OC 4th Company deployed to its rear with the attached 18th company in support. Two companies of the 1st Battalion were still on the track, the 1st company had been detached as escort for the supply column and as flank guard while the 3rd company was retained back on the Jordan to protect the column from attack in the direction of Madaba and guard the vehicle park which was unable to climb the hills, while half of the 2nd company was at Ain Amman with the Camel Field Ambulance and Brigade HQ acting as escort and guard, only the 4th company and two sections of the 2nd company were available to support the 2nd Battalion in its attack.

    When Camel Brigade deployed it moved all its animals back into the Wadi Amman for protection as the Turks gave warning with a few rounds of artillery which came as some surprise to the men as they had been briefed that Amman was only lightly occupied by a few Circassian irregulars with no artillery!

    The only artillery to arrive to support the Anzac Mounted Division’s attack was six 2.75 inch Mountain guns of the Hong Kong and Singapore Mountain Battery of which four pieces moved into position to cover the attack and to give what little support they could with their light guns and limited ammunition supply while the two remaining guns were in reserve to conserve ammunition and act as Anti Aircraft guns. The 2nd British Battalion formed up on the open ground to assault using the old roman road as a centre line with the 7th company on the left and the 10th company on the right under the direct command of Lieutenant Colonel Buxton, the 8th and 9th company were in support under Captain Arthur Newsam and the 4th company was held as Brigade reserve.


    At 3 pm the Cameleers began their attack advancing in artillery formation spread at intervals of three lines over the exposed ground, under the supervision of the 2nd Battalion Intelligence officer Lieutenant Robert Rowan, and led by Captain James Leadbetter of the Brigade Machine gun Squadron who carried out a reconnaissance ahead of the attacking troops and provided fire support with the guns of his Squadron from the flanks during which Private John Pearson was killed.

    The companies advanced slowly along the ridge line moving by section rushes as the Turks with held their fire until the last minute when the men had become fully exposed. Drawing near they came under a heavy concentrated enfilade fire from three sides as this bare crest was open to the Turks on Hill 3039 where they had their trenches arrayed in tiers at different heights, from the Amman Citadel in front and from to the caves to the north on the 2828 ridge. The 10th company was the hardest hit and quickly lost the company commander Lieutenant Joseph Lyall along with Lieutenant Alfred Wallbank and the Company Sergeant Major wounded, while Sergeant George Clarke along with a number of men were killed. The Hong Kong and Singapore Mountain Battery also came under fire from a number of Turkish 77mm guns which soon caused much concern as they struggled to maintain the support of the advance by firing at a slow rate.

    Meanwhile the attack was progressing in rushes as the assault endeavoured too cross the open plateau cut by bare fields and small stone fences where the men were constantly falling after being hit. As the fierce firestorm increased, the 7th and 10th company were soon shattered as they reached to within 600 yards of the city however the fire was too strong and soon the troops became bogged down and forced to find cover as the men struggled to survive on the exposed slope of the ridge. The attack now died away with Privates Norman Oliver, Arthur Bennett, Philip Evans, Leslie Lyons, Victor Blackwell and Sid Howard among the many fallen.

    As the Camel Brigade fought in front of Amman the 2nd Light Horse Brigade had attacked to the north, yet they to found the Turks well entrenched and supported by machine guns and artillery forcing them to break off the attempt with heavy losses.

    The Turkish defenders on this front were elements of the 2nd Battalion 126th Turkish Infantry Regiment (11th Division) with its machine gun company. These soldiers had not long arrived from Damascus and along two companies of the German 703rd Battalion had dug in along the approaches to Amman. The 703rd Battalion counted the attacks to the north made by the 2nd Light Horse Brigade, while the balance of the 126th Regiment covered the approaches to Amman and Hill 3039 who along with the soldiers of the Seria Group divided between the northern front under Lieutenant Colonel Omer Lutfu detached from the 126th Regiment and southern defences under Major Sait Bey. Over the last few days the Turks had sent reinforcements to Amman in mixed units these included those mentioned and also included elements of one battalion of the 191st Infantry Regiment 59th Division, a Mule Mounted battalion, the 59th Divisional Cavalry Company and the 46th Divisional Storm Company, as well as the Divisional Engineers and one field Battery and a mountain Battery of the 48th Division,

    Late in the afternoon the 18th company was committed under Major Leonard Kessels to assist the advance yet the impetus was not push forward after Kessels was wounded and because of the heavy fire, Lieutenant David Fairweather assumed command and the troops joined the 2nd Battalion in the dirt. There the men waited trying the escape the intense volume of fire directed on them as men hid behind small rocks till the welcome blanket of darkness closed in.

    At the end of the day with the Camel Brigades defeat and the failure of the 2nd Light Horse Brigades attack to the north made it all to plain to General Chaytor that Amman was strongly defended and would not fall to any quick attack made with the limited forces available to him and a fixed Battle would now have to be fought to have any chance of capturing this important objective. Chaytor also knew he didn’t have the troops or guns for such an attack and sent back to General Shea to send up the required men and guns.

    While the 1st and 2nd Battalions struggled in front of Amman the 4th Anzac Battalion with its demolition party had moved down to Quseir around 8 am, the few Turks guarding the Railway ran off on their approach and destroyed between three and five miles of track and succeeded in blowing up a number of culverts without any interference from the Turks. With the objective demolished the 4th Anzac Battalion came under the command of the New Zealand Mounted Brigade and moved at 5.30 pm to the right of the New Zealand Brigades line near Hill 3039 to support them in taking the key to Amman’s defences while also watching the destroyed brakes in the Hejaz Railway.


    As night fell on the 27th the exhausted companies of the 2nd Battalion began to dig trenches advancing their posts further in the dark to confuse the Turkish gunners. The troops were arranged from left to right with the 9th, 7th, 18th, 10th and 8th companies, the Brigade Machine Gun Squadron and 2nd company were utilized as a reserve line using their Lewis guns while the Brigade Machine Gun Squadron was also used to extend the firing line with their heavy Machine guns. The 7th company was the closest to the foremost Turkish defences on hill “400" in front of Amman and was kept under continued harassment during the night.

    Once darkness had fallen, the soldiers of the medical corps came into their own risking their lives rescuing wounded men trapped in no mans land. Corporal Ernest Eatock of the Camel Field Ambulance attached to the 1st Battalion went out with his stretcher bearers recovering wounded almost up to the Turkish trenches and under heavy fire, while Captain Reginald Andrews the 2nd Battalion RMO was wounded during the day from shell fire. The 4th company was also used as stretcher bearers to help recover the wounded during the night and as many as three officers and 70 men from the 2nd Battalion and one officer and 11 men of the 18th company were brought in before morning.

    The daybreak of the 28th dawned with the knowledge that Amman would not fall till there was more artillery and troops, General Shea had sent reinforcements of two Battalions of the 181st Infantry Brigade and elements of the IX Mountain Artillery Brigade during the night which arrived around 10.30 am, all had little ammunition or rest during the night and against the advice from their leaders to attack at dusk and allow these new troops to recuperate instead General Chaytor ordered a General attack at 1 pm by all units.

    The Camel Brigade planned to advance with the 7th company under Captain Edwin Deas which was closest to the Turks supported by the 9th company, they would be helped on the left by the 181st Infantry Brigade and a squadron from the 5th Light Horse Regiment who would attack along the 2828 ridge while the New Zealand Brigade was to attack Hill 3039 these attacks would it was hoped secure the Camel Brigades flanks from enfilade fire which had so devastated the 2nd Battalion on the 27th.

    At the appointed time the Cameleers advanced however instead of the expected support on their flanks little could be seen, yet despite this the men pushed on to within 250 yards of the Turkish line on the hill “400" yet could advance no further against heavy machine gun fire and shell salvos, three times Captain Deas lead his men forward only to see them cut down by a heavy barrage directed onto them from three sides and again the rank and file were forced to find what little cover was around and go to ground. The 9th company bore the bunt of the enemies’ fire and Lieutenant Sydney Gowlett was wounded with Lance Corporal William Temple and Private John Proctor among the dead. At 4 pm Captain Denson led the 4th company forward to strengthen the right flank of the 7th company and to draw the Turkish fire. The 4th company advanced quickly across the open ground and soon a heavy cross fire was directed onto them where they promptly lost a number of casualties in a few seconds, one man Private Harry Trevaskis had two bullets in the stomach. Captain Deas seeing the trouble in moving this company forward ordered them to stop and remain in position as the Turks fire was too strong. Company Sergeant Major Arthur Hermon from the 8th Company on several occasions under heavy fire greatly assisted in rallying his company and kept it together. Once darkness arrived, the advanced line of the 7th company was withdrawn with the 4th and 9th companies back to the previous positions as its present location was found to be so exposed, the woeful result of the day’s efforts was the further loss of two officers and 30 men killed or wounded within the British companies and with only a few men lost in the 4th company.

    During the day the Hong Kong and Singapore Mountain Battery again supported the attack and suffered for its bravery as two of the Turkish batteries took them under a sustained bombardment. At this time the battery was still using only four guns because of ammunition shortages and these guns were observed to knock out two of the Turkish guns while receiving a large number of shells for the effort which wounded one officer and three men and damaging the gun shields with shell splinters. During the day the New Zealand Brigade requested assistance and the two reserve guns were moved to support them.


    A conference of leaders was held at dusk by Captain Deas and Captain Denson who knew a frontal assault on the Turkish defences in broad daylight was sheer murder instead they proposed to try a bombing raid on the Turkish line that night. This plan was sent to General Smith who approved only he recommended the attack would best be attempted on the following night giving the men time to rest and reorganize. The 2nd Battalion now held a frontage of more than 1000 yards with only 210 men remaining in the four British companies while only 90 Australians remained of the 18th and 78 men from the 4th company, the Turks still held a strong position with enfilade fire from three directions which controlled all the approaches and the garrison was believed to be considerable with many machine guns and a large number of German soldiers.

    The reason for the lack of support on the Camel Brigades flanks during the day became clear once it was dark, as strong Turkish counterattacks on both the New Zealand Mounted and the 2nd Light Horse Brigades had occurred during the day. The 4th Anzac Battalion had continued with the demolition of the railway when at 11 am the 13th company under Captain Howard was attacked by a strong force of Turks who reached to within bombing distance of the lines yet were driven off with loss by Corporal William Black and Private Albert Footner, then a counterattack under Lieutenant Robert Tree, Corporal Tom Bantoft was found shot in the head after the Turks were gone. Then in the afternoon the company took part in the counterattack with the New Zealand Mounted holding the exposed right flank of the assault. The 13th company lost during the day five killed and 21 wounded, among those killed were Lance Corporal’s Fred Ellis, John Dunn, Privates Eric Jarrett and Dave Muir.

    At 1.30 pm the New Zealand Brigade had attacked Pt 3039, advancing by rushes to within 800 yards of the Turkish line and suffered heavy casualties from the Turkish defences, not to be deterred the intrepid kiwis quickly reorganized and tried again at 4 pm this attack with some difficulty reached no further than 500 yards from the Turkish line were they could advance no further, yet this excellent position allowed a line to be formed on some low ridges at the foot of Pt 3039 which could be exploited on the morrow.

    On the morning of the 29 March it was still raining and General Chaytor decided not to attack till more troops could be made available, he proposed and issued orders for the attack to be resumed at 2 am on the 30 March preferring a night attack to the folly of another daylight assault. The Camel Brigade spent a quiet morning as the Turks had withheld its fire thus allowing General Smith to visit with all officers to discuss the attack that night, he placed Lieutenant Fred Matthews in command of the 4th company allowing Captain Denson to command the 1st Battalion as Lieutenant Colonel Langley had been wounded in the face by shell fire.

    In the afternoon two companies of the 2/18th (London Irish Rifles) Battalion of the 181st Brigade under Captain Crossby arrived to reinforce the Brigade for the night foray.

    Because of the shortage of ammunition in the Hong Kong and Singapore Mountain Battery, Major Moore was forced to send back to Es Salt for some of the reserve ammunition in addition as the Turks continued to shell the battery positions with one man killed and two wounded yet thanks to the British we did secured a little from the two newly arrived batteries of the IXth Mountain Artillery Brigade to continue the battle till more should arrive.

    During the night the 179th Infantry Brigade and the remainder of the IX Mountain Artillery Brigade had been ordered by General Shea to Amman and were due from Es Salt during the day and while these new troops rested Turkish reinforcements were seen arriving by train from the north.

    These fresh Turkish troops included two battalions of the 23rd Turkish Infantry Regiment 8th Division, those units were all weak in strength, about 300 plus men, these quickly replaced the casualties and extended the defences to the north and south. The British reinforcements which had arrived (it was hoped) offset any Turkish build up, this and the intercepted wireless messages which said “that the Turks would evacuate the city” (although it proved to be false), had convinced General Chaytor to continue the contest.


    During the night of the 29 March the soldiers continued preparations till 10 pm when the attacking troops worked there way forward from the 7th companies old position keeping low and moving in line, the men managed to crawl to within 50 yards of the Turkish trench without being discovered. At midnight the sky was suddenly lit by flares and a heavy fusillade was sent at the old trenches however keeping low the exposed troops made no reply to this fire and it presently died down without any casualties. It was a cold and dark night as the rain fell and a slight wind was blowing the rain into the faces of the Turks while the men tried to rest soaked through with the Turks only a short distance away and waited apprehensively for the word to go.

    During this time the fatigued troops 4th Anzac Battalion, were also moving into positions when a High Explosive shell exploded among the men wounding Lieutenant Leslie Williamson in the wrist and Lieutenant Aubrey Reynolds in the leg and killing Sergeant Harry Robinson.

    The morning of the 30 March did not brood well for the Allied cause as rain fell heavily over the battlefield and as preparations continued the Camel brigade had moved into position in the dark. General Smith had ordered the assault to be carried out by a mixed force from the Brigade under command of Major Day, he assembled two sections from each of the 4th, 7th, 9th and 18th companies in the first wave under Captain Newsam while the remainder of the companies under Captain Deas formed the second wave in all about 200 men. The first lines in both waves were Cameleers while the two companies of the 2/18 London Battalion under Captain Crossby formed the second lines in both 1st and 2nd waves they also had about 200 men, the 8th and 10th company under Captain Tredinnick were in support with 120 men and the 2nd company and the Machine Gun Squadron were held in reserve to provide fire support. On the Brigades left flank the 2/18th London Battalion (less the two companies detached to the Camel Brigade) were to attack along the ridge towards Pt 2828 to pin down Turkish fire while the New Zealand Brigade with the 4th Anzac Battalion would attack Hill 3039.

    Promptly at 2 am the limited artillery fire fell on Amman and the surrounding area, this time the advance would not start till news came that the attacks on both flanks had been successful and were now clear, as the troops waited in their exposed position the limbs of the men cramped as they waited in the cold till the word came at 3.30 am and the signal was given by Captain Newsam with a blast on his whistle.

    The troops rose quickly (shaking out their cramps) into the assault and at once gained the first line of Turkish trenches on hill 400 showering the confused and surprised Turks with bombs, the fighting was short and deadly as the Turks fought hand to hand, some stayed to fight, more raised their hands while others ran taking pot shots as they disappeared into the darkness yet thankfully the fighting lasted only a few minutes before taking between 28 and 60 prisoners including two officers of the 126th Turkish Regiment and killing the remainder. Captain Arthur Newsam was killed shot in the back by a Turkish soldier who it was said had surrendered and a machine gun was captured by a soldier in the 7th company who having lost his rifle was armed only with two tins of bully beef while Private Archie Searle shot down five Turks with five rapid shots.

    The men having secured the first trench now pushed on to capture the second line acquiring it as the Turks broke and ran back into the city, Lieutenant Fred Matthews of the 4th company rushed after them with a collection of men and entered the city. There in the dark and rain they hid in the outer buildings however the hail of fire from the Citadel stopped any further advance and Privates Carl Pearce in the 4th and Bill Thornton from the 18th company was killed during the fighting.

    On the left flank the attack by the 2/18th London along the 2828 ridge had at first succeeded yet had broken down under heavy fire and the lack of pressure from this battalion allowed a number of Turkish guns to be turned on the exposed Camel Brigade these inflicting many causalities with their enfilade fire which soon forced the abandonment of the city by Lieutenant Matthews whose men could not be reinforced because of this fire, he ordered the men back to the positions won during the night where the remainder of the troops had consolidated in the enemies trenches and waited until the dawn. While taking a message back to HQ Private Gus Jennison was shot in the head and killed


    At 2 am the 4th Anzac Battalion was to advance with the New Zealand Brigade to attack Pt 3039 which required them to advance over 1500 yards of exposed ground, along the way the troops had to bypass a strong Turkish position on the route before assaulting the first Turkish trench. The men of the Battalion were all fatigued most not having rested for the last few days yet despite the bitterly cold and wet night all were ready for the attack.

    The attacking force deployed along the form up point on the Quseir track with the Auckland Mounted Rifles and 4th Anzac Battalion in the front wave and the Canterbury and Wellington Mounted Rifles in the second wave. The 4th Battalion had the 16th New Zealand Company under Captain George Yerex in front for the attack with the 17th company under Captain John Hampton in support both deployed in two lines while two sections of the 13th company was held in reserve, with the remainder of the company with the demo party watching the breaks in the Hejaz Railway.

    The advance went well from the start General Meldrum had planned his attack skilfully and the wind and rain helped by blowing into the faces of the Turks. Two troops of the Auckland Mounted Rifles secured the strong point in front of Pt 3039 allowing the remainder of the force with the 16th company to assault the foremost trenches which were captured at the rush with the bayonet taking the Turks by surprise, the garrison (who stayed) were all killed while the others ran away in the dark and 23 prisoners of the 126th Turkish Regiment and five Machine guns taken. Lieutenant George Sanderson the Battalion Intelligence officer, who had been ill and advised to remain behind, however had insisted on joining in the attack was killed during the assault. Veterinary Sergeant Matthew Kirkpatrick of the 16th company who in the last days had been busy caring for the many injured animals took part in the assault doing excellent work with the bayonet and clearing a section of trench allowing the objective to be gained by 2.40 am. Private Eric Tapfield of the 13th company had the misfortune to be accidentally killed during the advance when he progressed too far in front of the line and was mistakenly shot in the dark; he was found dead when the line reached him.

    As the men consolidated the captured position shooting came from the second line of Turkish trenches 300 yards ahead and the second wave of the Canterbury and Wellington Mounted Rifles moved up and captured them with 14 prisoners and a machine gun, more machine guns and prisoners were taken as the New Zealand troops concentrated while others moved around the hill to clear it of all the Turks. The 16th company as per orders was moved up to join the second wave and with troops of the Canterbury Mounted Rifles attacked the third trench, the Turkish fire was heavy yet mostly high and as the troops secured this last trench on top of hill 3039 the Turks fled towards Amman, the casualties thankfully during the assault were light.

    The warming rays of dawn showed to General Chaytor that the only success during the night had been limited to Hill 3039, a number of trenches captured by the Camel Corps in front of Amman and 181st Infantry Brigade to the north of the city and all were in danger of destruction as the Turks quickly organized a number of counterattacks against the ground lost during the night, the first of which came in on both sides of Hill 3039.

    The defence of the Hill had placed the 4th Anzac Battalion on the far right or eastern flank of the NZ Mounted Brigade with the Wellington Mounted Rifles on the Battalions left flank. All the Battalion worked on stone sangers during the night, these were built for protection as the rocky ground allowing the shallowest of holes to be dug as the troops had no entrenching tools and once daylight came it was found that the soldiers were too exposed on the top of hill so most were withdrawn to the rear trenches leaving only one section of 10 men and two Lewis guns of the 16th company to hold it.

    At 5 am the first attack came in supported by shell fire which smashed the stone Sangers the men had built for protection as shell and rock fragments sprayed the area. The shelling lasted an hour at which point the exposed section of Cameleers were withdrawn. By 9 am 500 Turks were seen massing to the north and at 9.30 they attacked yet despite their bravery the attack was beaten off by New Zealand troops with the help of captured machine guns. The Hong Kong and Singapore Battery had attached a section of guns to support the New Zealand Brigade in its attack however counter battery fire had smashed one of the guns sights and ammunition now ran out and the section was forced to retire to the main position.


    Despite this setback the Turks tried again and during this attack someone was heard to order a retirement this allowed the front trenches to be abandoned and the New Zealand trenches were lost as the troops fell back to their second line. This order was reported by the New Zealand Mounted to have come from the Camel Brigade however it was more probity a German or Turkish officer who spoke English which fooled the fatigued troops.

    This mix up was soon sorted out by the officers and a counterattack by the New Zealanders drove the Turks out of there ill gotten gains and down the hill at the point of the bayonet and the use of the bomb, the Adjutant Captain Alex Watt and the Regimental Sergeant Major Bob MacLean were wounded in the counterattack and Lieutenant’s Charles Thorby and Arthur Crawford of the 16th company inspired their men in the charge who with Sergeant Harold Jones as they coolly rallied their men and led them back into the Turkish trenches. Captain Stan Howard advanced with elements of the 13th company as the Turks made a fight of it however the men would not hold back and soon the Turks was driven off and despite the casualties the men stood on top of the hill shooting down at the panicked Turkish survivors as they fled back to Amman, the 16th company lost Sergeant Colin Campbell and Privates Carl Bailey, Roland Wilkie killed during the fighting. In the 17th Company Lance Corporal Stan Campbell was manning a Lewis gun when he was shot down, his brother Norm was the No 2 on the gun and quickly took his place only to be killed soon after, the Campbell brothers had enlisted in the 6th Light Horse Regiment in 1915 from Scone NSW before transferring to the Camel Corps, they died together on the barren heights of hill 3039.

    The Turkish troops used in these counter attacks were largely from the 23rd Regiment 8th Division and the 46th Storm Company. Who had not long arrived and took time to sort out where the allied line was and the bravery of these men advancing in the open was acknowledged by the New Zealand troops who fought them. The veteran 23rd Regiment (8th Division) had been fighting in the Caucasus against the Russians for some years only with the revolution had moved down to the Syrian Front, to be detached and sent to Amman the day before.

    While the New Zealand Brigade fought gallantly for there hard won gains on Hill 3039 the Camel companies under Major Day in front of Amman were subjected to attacks in force as the Turks was only 200 yards away, Major Julian Day was severely wounded in the arm and shoulder as the men sheltered from enfilade fire from artillery and machine guns under which a force of over 100 Turks attempted to recapture their trenches and reached within 30 yards before our fire cut them down and repulsed the attack with substantial loss, this assault was repeated again during the day as attacks continued without respite, the 10th company lost Sergeant Stuart Craggy (reported MIA) and Lance Corporal Wilfred Lyth killed during this attack.

    Meanwhile Lieutenant Leonard Brothers of the 9th company help organize the defence after Captain Newsam’s death as the Turkish fire increased killing Privates Stan Stanfield and Herb Thoday and under this intense fire Private Bob Robertson carried messages from company HQ to Captain Deas however despite the courage of the men they were ordered to hold the captured trenches as the supporting artillery ran short of shells while some batteries had ran out. The Hong Kong and Singapore battery was now down to only three guns as one had been put out off action with shell splinters and with no ammunition left little could be done to support the men.

    At 2 pm General Chaytor had ordered one last attack be made by the Infantry in the north yet it had little hope of success and with its failure the exhausted troops could do no more yet hold on. Lieutenant Herbert Denley was killed and Lieutenant Thomas Smith mortally wounded while attending to the defences, Private Arthur Mills of the 7th company found him self cut off with a number of wounded men as Turkish counterattacks came in, he held the line encouraging the men around him and providing first aid to the wounded. At 4 pm the troops were ordered to retire back to the original positions abandoning the captured works however because of the danger this was not attempted till dusk. Once it became dark the troops departed under Captain Deas direction back to the lines having buried the dead and carrying back the many wounded. This was accomplished without the enemies knowledge even though they were only a few hundred yards away with Lieutenant Matthews commanding the rear guard with the 4th company, as the worn out troops moved back in the darkness all the wounded were recovered however a few may have been left behind as some were reported missing later. The total Cameleers casualties in the attack were four officers and 40 men in the 2nd Battalion killed or wounded with about 20 Australian casualties.

    The 2/18th London battalion reported the lost of five men killed and two officers and four men died of wounds with the wounded unknown while supporting the action on the 30 March.


    Meanwhile on Hill 3039 the Battle still went on as the enemy kept throwing attack after attack at the New Zealanders. The next came at 4 pm and fell on the Camel Battalion where the Turks of the 46th Storm company out flanked the Cameleers line on the right and managed to gained a lodgement, Lieutenant Charles Thorby a butcher from Dannevirke NZ gathered a few men about him and led a counterattack to drive the Turks out yet was killed in the valiant attempt, while Corporal John McMillan carrying a Lewis gun advanced on the Turks firing his gun from the hip however he was soon killed, then Private Dave McConnell who had joined the attack by garbing a sack full of bombs, threw them with deadly effect until shot down, as Private Len Pask went out rescuing the wounded however thanks to the support of New Zealand reserves which in turn out flanked the Turks the attack was driven off. The casualties continued to mount in the battalion and the 17th company lost Corporal Bert Lincoln (reported MIA), Lance Corporal’s Bill Brown, Eric Cheney (reported MIA), Privates Cliff Jenkins (reported MIA) and Percy Collins killed, while the 13th company lost Corporal George Haag (reported MIA), Lance Corporal Les Delaney (reported MIA), Private’s Bill Temple and Will Trenaman (reported MIA) killed, the 16th company lost Sergeant Charles Lovett, Private’s Gilbert Alexander, Tom Bowman, John Craig, Rupert McKenzie, Sid Mills and Doug Walker killed.

    During the day communication between Battalion HQ and the forward companies was constantly broken by shell fire which fell regularly over the exposed hill, Sergeant Albert Hooper was kept out continually repairing broken telephone lines at great risk to himself. Communications were accentual to the defence which enabled reinforcements to be switched from one threaten point to the next and under the able command of Lieutenant Reg Jephcott never failed. At 5 p.m. another attack came on with the support of three Turks batteries yet again it was stopped with assistance of the recently arrived Somerset battery using the last of its available ammunition.

    As the long day wore on General Shea on hearing of the progress of the Battle asked General Chaytor his chances of success “if he could take the city” which he replied “little to none and only if reinforced with more guns and troops” these were now not available to Shea and he knew the battle was lost. The word was sent out at 5.45pm that the contest was over and all troops were ordered to be prepared to retire back across the Jordan.

    In the late afternoon a supply column had arrived bring a little food and ammunition and a soldier was dispatched up the hill with a camel carrying a bag of rations and two fantasies of hot tea, he also carried the battalions withdrawal order which was gladly received as well as the tea.

    That night the Army began to move back as the New Zealanders and 4th Anzac Battalion received their orders around 6 p.m, they began moving down from Hill 3039 at midnight with the many wounded carried in blankets as the rear guard covered the withdrawal however the Turks did not bother them.

    The Camel Brigade began its return movement at 4.30 am Lieutenant Bob Love commanded the rear guard and once the troops began to move he was informed that a man was missing, he retraced his steeps in the dark to search for the missing man who in the meanwhile had returned and found instead a four man post over looked in the darkness.

    The Brigade reached Ain es Sir by 7.15 am on the 31 March and although the Turks pressed the rear guard causally, the Camel Brigade was ordered to get clear acting as escort to the supply train and the wounded who were suffering terribly. The column moved slowly as there were not enough cachalots for all the wounded and some had to be strapped to the backs of horses until they could be placed in ambulances. At 10 am the troops continued threw rain and mud some men of the 1st Battalion picked up refugees struggling along the track helping the many women and children, many Armenian Christians fleeing Turkish oppression, while Lieutenant Colonel Mills told how he carried a four years old girl sleeping in his arms. The Brigade finally crossing the Jordan on the 2 April after eleven days from the commencement of the raid, the camels had not had the saddles off their backs for eight of those days and when they did their flesh came away with them.


    The Raid on Amman was tactically a defeat in which the main objectives of the raid were not all achieved although it was claimed as a victory by General Allenby. There were many reasons for the failure of the Amman Raid these included the delayed crossing of the Jordan River, the foul weather and the unexpected strong defence of Amman all had contributed to the result, the men as always fought well yet had suffered from the conditions with the march up to Amman and the battle, all the animals and men had suffered much and were worn out by fatigue and heavy losses. One of the success of the raid was that the enemies reserves had been drawn to Amman, enough troops had been moved north from the Tafila Force to help the Emir Feisal in his campaign against the Maan garrison and attention was drawn east away from Allenby’s future planned offensive.

    However the Turkish resistance at Amman had restored their confidence in its troops which had been low following their defeats in November and December 1917 and allowed the Turks to plan a major offensive aimed at the reorganizing British Army in April.

    The Casualties for the Camel Brigade were reported in the War Diary as five officers and 56 men killed and 17 officers and 232 men wounded while 11 men were reported missing total 321.

    The casualties by Battalion were the Australians of the 1st Battalion with two other ranks killed and one officer (Lieutenant Colonel Langley) and nine men wounded.

    The 2nd (British) Battalion reported losses as three officers (Captain Newsam, Lieutenant ‘s. Denley and Smith) and 24 other ranks killed and seven officers, 112 men wounded of which nine other ranks died from wounds and one man was reported wounded and missing.

    The Anzacs of the 4th Battalion had two officers (Lieutenant’s Thorby (NZ) and Sanderson) and 29 other ranks killed with five officers and 117 other ranks wounded of which one officer (Lieutenant Adolph (NZ) and five other ranks died of wounds while 10 men were reported missing. Of this total the New Zealanders of the 16th company had lost one officer and 12 other ranks killed with one officer, two other ranks died of wounds while the wounded were not recorded whereas the Australians lost one officer and 17 men killed with five officers and 99 men wounded which six men died of wounds.

    The Hong Kong and Singapore Battery had one other rank killed and one officer and five men wounded, the Brigade Machine Gun Squadron had one man killed and two wounded.

    No soldier in the Camel Brigade was known to be captured during the four day Battle in front of Amman and the missing were all believed to have been killed or wounded and or later accounted for. The large number of missing came from the loss of the grave sites after this battle which had been lost or destroyed by time or human hand when they couldn’t be found post war.

    Cheers

    S.B

    stevenbecker

      Posts: 257
      Joined: Mon Dec 04, 2006 11:48 am
      Location: Brisbane

  THE BATTLE OF MUSALLABEH (present - I don't think so)
    THE BATTLE OF MUSALLABEH

    By Steve Becker

    On the 2 April the exhausted Camel Brigade recrossed the Jordan River at the Ghoraniye bridgehead following the disappointing end of the Amman Raid. However, due to tactical reasons General Allenby needed the Ghoraniye Bridgehead kept open for prospective operations on the east bank of the Jordan River. General Chaytor was placed in command of all forces in the Jordan Valley and tasked with its defence. These forces included the Anzac Mounted Division of the 1st and 2nd Light Horse Brigades, New Zealand Mounted Brigade and the Camel Brigade.

    While the major units of the division deployed around the bridgehead the Camel Brigade was allocated the line from Abu Tell to the Wadi Mellaha, north of the bridgehead which included the Musallabeh feature, attached to the brigade were two regiments of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade supported by the 301st Artillery Brigade RFA (60th Division) and a section of 10th Heavy Battery.

    The Camel Brigade was at this time comprised of the following Companies;

    Camel Brigade HQ BrigGen Smith VC

    1st Anzac Battalion

    LtCol Langley & Maj Nobbs 2ic

    1st Co

    Capt Wright

    2nd Co

    Capt Mills

    3rd Co

    Capt Hogue

    4th Co

    Lt Love

    2nd British Battalion LtCol Bassatt

    7th British Co

    Capt Deas

    8th British Co

    Lt Inchbald

    9th British Co

    Lt Brothers

    10th British Co

    Capt Patterson

    4th Anzac Battalion LtCol Mills & 2ic Maj Hemphill (NZ)

    13th Co

    Capt Nobbs

    16th NZ Co

    Capt Yerex

    17th Co

    Capt Hampton

    18th Co

    Capt Howard

    HKSB

    Maj Moore

    26 MG Sqn

    Maj Millar

    Aust Camel FA

    Mc Laren

    General Smith was given a large area to defend with his battered and diminished brigade he deployed the 2nd Battalion on Musallabeh Hill or Pt 603 and along the Abu Tellul who relieved the 2/4th Royal West Surrey and 2/4th Royal West Kent Regiments of the 160th Infantry Brigade 53rd Division at 6.10 pm on the 2 April, while the 4th Anzac Battalion took up positions along the Wadi Mellaha and the 1st Battalion was in reserve with the two Light Horse regiments of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade when they arrived of whom the 7th Light Horse Regiment reported on the 3rd April. The 301st Brigade RFA (60th Division) and a section of 10th Heavy Battery along with the Hong Kong Singapore battery supported the force along the Wadi El Audi.

    The key in the defence of Ghoraniye Bridgehead was Musallabeh Hill lying approx 10 miles north, this large feature jutting out from the Judaean foot hills was 400 yards long and from 150 to 200 yards across extending from the southeast to northeast, the valley sides were steep on its east side as they contoured to the south, on its west side the steep sides limited observation from the top into the wadi below while to the north and west the ground was cut by a number of deep wadis which allowed the Turks some freedom of movement and two large hills named Brown and Green gave the Turkish positions for artillery observers to look onto the Musallabeh position. To the south the position extended throughout the Abu Tellul which had four large features veering in height to 343 ft and from Mesallabeh to the Wadi Aujah the distance was more than 2 miles.

    The Wadi Mellahah on the eastern side of Musallabeh Hill proved a difficult obstacle by its steep sides which after the recent rains contain enough water to discourage direct attack in that area while the upper reaches of the Wadi contained a swamp and the muddy ground allowed only limited movement, the position from the Wadi Aujah along the Wadi Mellahah to Musallabeh was more than 5 miles.

    On the 9 April the 1st Battalion relieved the 2nd Battalion on Musallabeh Hill at midnight, Langley’s Battalion was by far the strongest in the Brigade having suffered fewer casualties during the raid on Amman and so was given a large area to defend. Lieutenant Colonel George Langley still recovering from a wound placed Captain Ernest Mills MC with his 2nd Company on top of Musallabeh Hill, replaced the 8th company, which had completed limited work on the defence. The position was restricted and could hold only one company while the remainder of the Battalion were placed along the Abu Tellul with the 3rd and 1st Companies in post’s on the four highest points to cover Pt 603 to the Wadi Auji in the south. The 4th company (less one section attached to the 2nd company) was held in reserve near the Bluff a small hill to the rear of Musallabeh along with Battalion headquarters. All posts along the battalions line was ordered to be placed about 500 yards apart and were to be held at least two officers and 40 men where possible.

    The 4th Anzac Battalion had deployed three companies in line along the Wadi Mullaha from Musallabeh Hill to the Jordan River with the 18th company on the left flank and the 13th company in reserve, the position was long and could not be entirely covered with the troops at hand, Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Mills instead relied on a number of section posts with interlocking fields of fire to cover the area and the reserve company to counterattack.

    The 2nd Battalion had all four depleted companies around the crossing of the Wadi El Audi with the 6th and 7th Light Horse Regiments to their rear. Both Light Horse Regiments provided patrols to cover the gap between the 1st and 4th Anzac Battalions north of the Bluff as well as patrolling on the flanks. On the 9 April the 10th company sent three sections under the command of Lieutenant Thomas Nottidge to support the 1st Battalion and occupied a number of posts on the Abu Tellul while one section of the 9th company under Lieutenant Alexander Worth was sent to the eastern end of the wadi Aujah overlooking the Jordan River.

    The Brigade at this time was in a sorry state with many of the animals suffering from the effects of the weather, terrain and disease and well below strength from its losses during the Amman Raid both the 2nd and 4th Battalions had shouldered the brunt of the fighting during this battle and more than half their companies were lucky to muster 80 men, each camel holder being required to hold twelve animals instead of the normal four allowing more men for the firing line.

    General Smith ordered the defences constructed with all work to be finished as quickly as possible, as an attack was expected on the bridgehead and all battalions tried to work on the trenches yet the ground was rocky and little impression could be made with the tools available to a mounted Brigade, some wiring was done on the hill however not to any extent.

    While Allenby’s Army had slipped back across the Jordan river, the German Commander Liman Von Sanders was busy moving troops of the 4th Turkish Army from Amman down to the Ghoraniye Bridgehead this was held by the 8th Turkish Corps just south of Es Salt which included weak units of the 48th Turkish Division and the East Jordan Group known to the Turks as the Seria Group now organized as a below strength mixed Division called Lutfu Murettep, also elements of Pasha II Group of the German Asia Corps and two Turkish Cavalry Regiments (6th and 7th) of the 3rd Turkish Cavalry Division, while to the north in the 7th Turkish Armies sector west of the Jordan River, the 20th Turkish Corps of the 53rd Division moved south of Nablus to threaten Musallabeh and the Ghoraniye bridgehead from that direction.

    During the 1st week of April Colonel Selahattin commander of the 53rd Division pushed elements of his division down towards Musallabeh into the Wadis north of that hill and carried out a reconnaissance with the attached 8th Turkish Cavalry Regiment 3rd Cavalry Division of the area to be attacked.

    The 53rd Division were old sparing partners of the Camel Brigade having first met during the 2nd Gaza Battle in April 1917, there the Camel Brigade come off second best in a long day fight and suffered their highest casualties of the war.

    The 145th Turkish Infantry Regiment (46th Division) attached to the 53rd Division led the forces supported by the experienced 163rd Turkish Infantry Regiment and a number of batteries of the 14th Artillery Regiment. These units moved into the hills north of Musallabeh and prepared for the assault while the 8th Cavalry Regiment moved down along the Jordan to threaten that flank.

    The success of which all these preparations that the Turks being ready by the 10 April. With the limited artillery available the main weight of the attack would fall on the defence around Musallabeh as its capture would compel the British to abandon the Ghoraniye Bridgehead, attacks would also be made on that bridgehead to pin the British and hasten their departure with the success at Pt 603.

    The Light Horse patrols from B Squadron 7th Light Horse Regiment were in contact with small groups of Turkish Infantry and Cavalry during the 8 and 9 April and A and B Squadron’s of the 6th Light Horse were sent up the Wadi Auja and Wadi Abeid to protect the open left flank. The Turks started shelling Musallabeh from the 5 April looking for the movement of troops along the Wadi Auja and their Air force came over dropping a large number of bombs in the area which killed a number of animals and disrupted the supply services of the Camel Transport Corps.

    On the 10 April Turkish artillery fire increased in strength searching for the Camel Corps posts on Musallabeh, the men were busy working on the defences yet the ground was full of clay and rocks and made work difficult with the summer heat, still with the Turks ever observant a number of men were soon hit inflicting heavy casualties on the exposed soldiers. Among those killed were the defenders of an isolated post of the 4th company manned by Private’s John Souter, Claude Jackson, Herbert Garland, Francis O’Rourke and Walter McAuliffe and a number of others from 2nd company who were hit by shell fire killing John Souter while from the 2nd company Private’s Joe Osborne, William “fatty” Miller and William Taylor were killed, Taylor was No 3 with Souter when hit in the buttocks, he died of these wounds later in the day at the Camel Field Ambulance as did Joe Osborne who had been hit by shrapnel in the throat.

    One thing remembered about the Musallabeh position was the fly’s which swarmed in large numbers getting into every thing from food to drink, it was said that they were worst then those on Gallipoli only bigger while these were smaller and “you could get more on a slice of bread and jam”. At night the mosquitoes came out to the discomfort of the troops which with the resiant rains had provided ample areas for there breeding and malaria would soon become a major problem.

    Once night had fallen the section post’s heard movement to their front and soon calls of “Allah” could be heard in the darkness, all posts were “stood to” and some nervous fingers fired a few rounds which was taken up by a number of posts however the Turks did not show them selves, much to the disappointment of the men. The troops knew an attack was coming as many of these men were old hands most having been under arms for three years and there were still many Gallipoli veterans in their ranks and knew the signs that the Turks were coming to get them.

    At 4 am on the 11 April the Turks made no attempt of surprise when a heavy bombardment was opened on Musallabeh Hill and surrounding posts, this lasted for an hour with one shell falling every second on the hill during which the Turks crept up close to the 2nd company’s posts before launching their assault. At 5 am heavy formations of the 145th Turkish Infantry Regiment under Major Ali Riza attacked from the east and north of Musallabeh under the cries of “Allah”, soon the first soldiers were held up on the thin barb wire screen and shot down in large numbers as more pushed forward only the men of the 2nd company meet them with rifle fire and bombs. The bravery of the Turks was impressive shouting “Allah” they threw themselves at the defences with abandon despite the intensity of fire directed on them they came on again and again looking for the weak spot in the defences.

    The Turks during this time were having to struggle up the steep slopes of the hill which made them visible to Australians on Musallabeh and Abu Tellul and once they became exposed on top the Cameliers opened an effective fire yet couldn’t engage those further down the slope without themselves becoming vulnerable to Turkish return fire which by standing up the Turks would pick off any man raising his head above the trench.

    Captain Mills was wounded early in the fight and forced to control the battle from his HQ while Lieutenant Arthur Mackenzie took over the company in the forward area directing fire and encouraging the men as the Turks closed in on the posts manned by the 2nd company throwing bombs and firing at the exposed heads of the Cameliers yet as long as the ammunition and bombs held out they knew the posts could be retained. Private Roy Woodhead was killed while carrying bombs from company HQ when a shell hit him, his pay book and a piece of tunic was all that was found two days later.

    Lieutenant Harry Malcolm was in charge of one of the most exposed post on Musallabeh this post on the far right flank and was attacked by over 100 Turks from all sides still Lieutenant Malcolm and his small garrison crushed every assault directed at them inflicting heavy casualties on the Turks, he was wounded late in the day yet this isolated post held on.

    In another post Private George Spring was the last man left in his Lewis gun section and while wounded held off attacks with his Lewis gun all day constantly exposing himself to the Turks and when his gun was knocked out he calmly fixed it and continued fighting while Private Tom McGrath in command of a section of the company bombers moved from post to post throwing bombs until he was hit in the head, his work and bravery helped the defences during this critical time.

    As the struggle developed Private William McGrath, Captain Mills orderly ran messages from company HQ to the isolated posts when the telephone lines were cut, eight times he exposed himself to fire running up and down the mountain with messages and guiding reinforcements without being hit.

    Within an hour of the start of the battle the first wave of the Turks appeared broken however the Turks had only gone to ground and opened a intense fire at close quarters on the trenches pinning the 2nd company with machine guns dragged up the hill and from snipers which appeared to be all over while a second assault was organized.

    The 4th Company at this time was committed as the Turks pushed around Musallabeh from the north as fighting spread to the Pimple with the 4th Company and the flank of the 18th company which became engaged as it directed fire at the Turks trying to attack the hill on three sides. After 3 hours of fighting the ammunition began to run low and at one stage one of the posts were throwing rocks down on the Turks yet the Cameliers mastered every situation with the skill of Captain Mills and Lieutenant Bob Love of the 4th company who commanded a section post under heavy attack and where his skill at handling the Lewis gun teams broke up two Turkish assaults. At 8.45 am the worst of the fighting appeared over and the 7th Light Horse alerted earlier to support the 1st Battalion was withdrawn other then one Troop of B Squadron under Lieutenant Ducker instead a Troop from B Squadron 6th Light Horse was sent to the right flank of the 4th Battalion to support their open flank.

    During this interval the 2nd Battalion was ordered to send a company up to the 1st Battalion as the remainder of reserve 4th company had been committed to support Captain Mills. The 7th Company had been alerted at 6.30 am and moved up as the Turks now hiding behind what ever cover they could find still inflicted casualties on the Cameliers, Lieutenant Arthur Nield was killed shot in the head trying to observe over the trenches for his Lewis gun teams as was Private Bob Quinn while Private Walt Feebry was shot in the neck, Private Tom McKenzie-Campbell from Chicago South Australia was mortally wounded by shell fire, as was Private Bill Raynor and Arthur Brown who were killed. Private Turlough O’Brien was almost hit by a shell only to suffer concussion and suffering from shell shock was comforted by his mates as the Turks cut off any hope of evacuation, the Camel Field Ambulance tried to extract the wounded however the Red Cross was no protection from the fire and the wounded had to wait till dark to be recovered. At 9 am Captain Deas took temporary command of his position on Abu Tellul while the Turks continued to shell the area.

    By midday the Turks now suffering from the heat were desperate for water many were spared by the Cameliers when trying to find water a habit not reciprocated by the Turks whose snipers were kept busy shooting at any movement. The Battalion signallers had been working all day repairing lines cut by the heavy shell fire, these signallers Corporal Stanley McCallum, Private’s John Bond and Lewis Gitsham were on their feet for over 70 hours during the next few days repairing telephone lines and helping out with the defence while under the able command of Lieutenant James Holland the Battalion signal officer.

    By the afternoon the Turks foiled in their frontal assault directed troops towards the Wadi Auja and the 3rd and 10th companies on Abu Tulul or Pt 343, B Squadron of the 7th Light Horse moving from Tell Et Truni checked them on the upper reaches of the Auja and a mixed force of the 7th and the remainder of the 10th companies were sent to Abu Tulul with a number of Machine gun sections of the Brigade Machine gun Squadron as the 3rd company was now drawn to the north to support the defences around Musallabeh.

    At 3 pm the Turks were seen massing in the Wadis Bakr and Mereighat to attack the positions on Abu Tulul and at 4 pm a heavy bombardment fell around Musallabeh under cover of which elements of the 163rd Turkish Infantry Regiment assaulted, this time they gained a hold at the base of the hill and still were unable to maintain there position, Sergeant Charles Ledingham of the Brigade Machine gun Squadron beat off one attack after other as they rushed his position, his section using their Vickers guns and bombs held them off enabling a quick counterattack which drove the Turks out of their limited gains and down the slopes by the aggressive used of the bayonet and bomb. At 4.30 pm the remainder of the 10th company was moved up to support the 7th company while Lieutenant Walker’s troop of C Squadron 7th Light Horse supported by moving around Musallabeh from the south to help clear snipers from the sector, this pressure stopped the Turks in the threaten area and relieved the danger from that flank.

    By dark the Turks had enough after three separate major assaults on the Musallabeh Hill position they had failed to gain any ground and had squandered many lives. Despite the courageous attempt the Turks were now exhausted by the battle and had no water all day, furthermore the attacks around the Ghoraniye Bridgehead had also failed and during the night the Turkish commander ordered the assaults stopped and withdrew taking with them they’re many wounded.

    As blackness fell over the battlefield the stunned soldiers of the 1st Battalion searched for their mates and waited for the battle to be resumed, however despite the silence of the night there was much movement in the dark as the Turks withdrew. This allowed the Medical Corps to remove their own wounded and supplies to be brought up. The casualties were heavy amongst the engaged companies and the men were exhausted by their experience, the 2nd company whose strength never numbered more than 100 men had lost around 60 casualties.

    With the coming morning patrols of the 2nd Battalion and A Squadron 7th Light Horse Regiment were dispatched covered by the A Squadron 6th Light Horse, they found and counted over 170 dead Turks around the Musallabeh position and discovered they had withdrawn into the hills to the north, one Turkish Cavalry soldier was captured by C Squadron 7th Light Horse Regiment. On the 12 April the Brigade changed its positions as the 2nd Battalion took over the left flank along the Abu Tellul and the 1st Battalion concentrated in the centre, the 4th Battalion remained in its present location. One company of the Patiala Imperial Service Regiment moved up to assist the 2nd Battalion.

    Patrols continued during the week to encounter groups of Turks and the Hill was shelled however there was no serious fighting in this area, a number of deserters came in and on the 15 April the Commander and Chief General Allenby arrived to inspect the Brigade, he complemented the men on their actions and recommended that Musallabeh Hill or Pt 603 should be renamed the Camels Hump in Honour of the Brigade for their stout defence.

    This was to be the last major action by the Camel Brigade and the casualties again reflected the aggressive bravery of the Camel soldiers.

    The casualties to the Australians of the 1st Battalion were one officer (Lieutenant Nield), 18 men killed and four officers and 82 other ranks wounded of which two men died of wounds, principally all in the 2nd Company.

    The 2nd Battalion reported three men killed and nine men wounded while the Brigade Machine Gun Squadron did not record any casualties.

    The 4th Anzac Battalion reported their losses as three men wounded while New Zealanders of the 16th Company were not engaged and recorded no casualties

    Cheers

    S.B

  Jordan Valley (present?)

  Machine Gun Corps/Tul Keram/Nablus
    Appears not with MGC - but spent 1 month with WMR from 16 Aug - 16 Sep 1918. Devils on Horses page 306-7 suggests they were preparing for an attack (Z-day), and were protecting the right flank of the EEF in the Jordan Valley while masking the movement of troops away, and building thousands of dummy horses.

  Road to Damascus/Gorge

  Syria & back to Egypt?
